---
title: Black Journalists Note the Klanâ€™s Hatred for Other Groups on Stone Mountain
---

Black Journalists Note the Klan's Hatred for Other Groups on Stone
Mountain

Although formed as a violent reaction against Black enfranchisement
during Reconstruction, the Ku Klux Klan also supported nativism,
anti-Catholicism, and antisemitism. When the second Klan emerged on
Stone Mountain in 1915, the rebirthed organization formally adopted
these tenets.[^1] Stone Mountain at that time was nothing more than a
large block of granite, but it came to serve as a driver of Klan
organizing. Black reporters were keenly aware that they were not alone
in being targeted by the Klan's hatred. They frequently made reference
to the scope of the Klan's hostilities, painting the Klan as a fringe
hate group that threatened wide swathes of US society.

In 1920, the *New York Age* noted the Klan's membership requirements as
follows: "\[It is stated that\] no one not born in the United States is
eligible to membership and that no Catholic or Jew can become a member,"
before adding "this is a discreditable reflection on native Americans
and a badge of distinction for Catholics and Jews."[^2]

In a different tone, the *Detroit Tribune* wrote in October of 1945,
"Organizations, such as the Ku Klux Klan, which set out deliberately to
stir up hatred against Negro Americans, under the guise of white
supremacy, will not stop there, but will become bolder with success and
eventually direct sinister campaigns against other minority groups,
including Jews, foreigners, and Catholics." They pointed out that the
Klan's agenda was not limited to white supremacy and anti-Blackness, but
to other forms of racism, as well. They also urged the national
government to act: "The world wants peace," they declared, "but the
peace is not helped by fanatics of any race who boast their superiority
and believe in treading roughshod over the rights of other human
beings."[^3]

A regular contributor to the *Weekly Review* of Birmingham, Bernice
Scarr, also responded to the activities on Stone Mountain and noted the
Klan's wide range of targets. She commented in her 1945 editorial that
the Ku Klux Klan is still a "real danger to Negroes, Catholics, Jews and
labor," before adding that "While the terrorism, lynching, beating, and
Ku Klux murders of the 1930's in South Carolina, Florida, and Georgia,
particularly, still darken our memories, the same group plans to renew
its brutal attacks upon minority, racial, and labor groups."[^4]

Eleven months later, the *Weekly Review* republished a piece by C.W.
Rice, editor of *Negro Labor News*. Revisiting the moment of the Klan's
revitalization on Stone Mountain, he struck a note of optimism,
proposing that "the Klan is up against the toughest job since it was
formed in the 'Carpet-Bagger' days, reorganized in 1915 then launched
its attack on Catholics, Jews, and Negroes." He noted that Black people
were defying the Klan, recounting "the last time the Klan marched in
Negro section \[sic\] in Atlanta, a Negro walked up and pulled the
pillowcase off one of the Klansmen's head\[s\] and put it on his head
and entertained other Negroes during the parade. This is a fair example
of how much the Negro is excited over the Klansmen."[^5] Black
journalists thus consistently built networks of solidarity with other
marginalized groups by reaffirming their common foe in the Klan.

[^1]: Homer Bigart, "99 Years of Ku Klux Klan: It All Started
    Innocently...," *Tampa Bay Times*, 60.

[^2]: New York Age, "Ku Klux Klan Missionaries" (1920 Oct 30)

[^3]: *Detroit Tribune* - The Klan Girds Again (1945 Oct 27)

[^4]: Bernice Scarr - Ku Klux Klan Still Is Real Danger to Negroes
    Catholics Jews and Labor (1945 Jan 06)

[^5]: C.W. Rice - No Fear of KKK (1945 Dec 08)
