---
title: Confederate Flag Controversy at Ole Miss
---

# Confederate Flag Controversy at Ole Miss

In the early 1980s, the University of Mississippi (Ole Miss) was
embroiled in controversy over the use of the Confederate flag as a
school symbol. In spring of 1982, the University of Mississippi student
body elected its first Black cheerleader, John Hawkings, to the school
squad. That fall, however, Hawkings refused to take part in the
traditional waving of the Confederate Flag at the home opener. Although
Hawkins attended the game, he refused to wave the flag and the
responsibility was given to another cheerleader[^1]

While the Confederate flag was not an official school symbol, it was in
regular use as an unofficial one. Hawkings' refusal to wave it was the
first incident in what became a larger confrontation between Black
students and the university the following spring.[^2] According to the
Black journalist organization *United Press International*, the school's
Black Student Union presented university officials with a petition of 13
demands, including "removal of 'all racist symbols' such as the Rebel
flag, the Colonel Rebel mascot and the song 'Dixie' at school events.
They also called for more Black faculty, counselors, Black Studies
classes and job placement programs for Blacks."[^3] It is unclear if
these requests were made public by the Black Student Union or if they
were leaked to the student body by word of mouth. But when the broader,
predominantly white student population found out about the demand to
remove the flag from school events, the result was a faceoff between
white and Black students.

Black papers *Atlanta Daily World*, *The Carolina Times*, and
*Afro-American* published reports by UPI to detail the basics of the
controversy: the who, what, where, when, why, and how. The UPI reported
that on Monday, April 18th, 1983, "hundreds of white students gathered
on campus...singing 'Dixie' and chanting 'Save the Flag.'" The students
then protested in front of the house of Chancellor Porter Fortune before
moving onto the school's only Black fraternity house at the time, home
of Phi Beta Sigma.[^4]

While reports from UPI conveyed the bare facts of the event, it was a
series of op-eds that captured the emotional aspects of the situation.
The UPI report on the April 18th protests, for instance, only stated
"there were no incidents,"[^5] a phrasing that conveyed no physical
injury, without documenting the psychological and traumatic effects of
the events. Leon Daniels, a UPI reporter, authored his own op-eds to
publicize these emotional aspects. In his reporting on the April 18th
demonstration, he interviewed a member of the Black fraternity that was
the site of the protests: "'I was afraid,' said \[Danny\] Love, who
described how he and several other brothers huddled inside the only
fraternity house for Blacks at Ole Miss, listening to the mob outside
scream 'nigger.' 'We knew they were capable of breaking into the
house.'" Love's account, Daniels pointed out, stands in stark contrast
to what Ed Meek, Ole Miss' director of the university's department of
public relations, told Daniels about the protests: "It was nothing but a
spring pep rally."

Daniels reported on facets of the controversy that news services were
not capturing, emphasizing the impact of the flag and the volatile white
protests on Black students. He went on to write:

> Fear is what this story is all about, although some on both sides of
> the issue insist it is about...the confederate flag that white Ole
> Miss students are fond of waving at football games. To many of the 700
> or so black students, it seems that the 9,300 white students and
> thousands of white fans are waving 'racist symbols' in their faces.

Daniels also reported on how Black football players were affected,
something the other news service reports overlooked. White students at
Ole Miss insisted that the waving of the Confederate flags was meant to
inspire their football team, although almost half of the team at the
time was Black. When it came to the controversy, Daniels reported "The
black players do not say anything. That is because, according to the
black students, the players fear losing their athletic scholarships.
Coaches privately acknowledge the rebel flag hinders their efforts to
recruit black athletes."

Commemoration of the Confederacy was ingrained in the culture of the
campus and the surrounding town, another central issue in Daniels'
reporting. The demonstration outside of Phi Beta Sigma took place at the
beginning of Dixie Week, a "campus celebration of spring that features
food, fun, and lots of beer...Rebel flags fly from windows at fraternity
houses and dormitories. Business establishments in town display signs
saying 'save the flag.'"[^6]

Daniels and other Black journalists also connected the incidents to
riots that had taken place two decades before, when James Meredith
integrated Ole Miss. When first reporting on the controversy, the UPI
made sure to note that Ole Miss was "the scene of a major outburst 20
years ago when James Meredith finally entered school after 3,000
National Guard Troops put down the riot."[^7] Using vivid, dramatic
terms, Daniels described the University as being "deflowered in 1962 in
an explosion of rioting set off by racial hatred" and claimed that in
these new demonstrations, it "has been violated again by those who claim
to love her."[^8]

The day after the protests by white students, Black students held a
demonstration of their own. Hundreds of Black students gathered at the
main administration building, where they held hands and recited the
Lord's Prayer. This was followed by the singing of "We Shall Overcome,"
"the anthem of the Civil Rights movement in the 1960s."[^9] Following
the Black students' calls for the Confederate flag to be disavowed by
the university, 3,000 Ole Miss students signed a petition urging
university officials not to do so.[^10]

In the weeks following the demonstrations, University Chancellor Porter
Fortune announced a new school policy that would prohibit the flag from
being used by the university as a school symbol, but stated it would
have no effect on the ability of individual students to wave or display
the flag themselves. He also stated that the school would continue to
use the Confederate Rebel as their mascot and that "Dixie" would still
be sung as an official school song. Black students met the announcement
with harsh criticism while white students celebrated what they saw as a
victory.[^11]

The controversy was brought back to the national spotlight in 1991, when
student Thomas Lowell Ketchum, Jr., brought the University to court over
what he claimed was "an illegal ban on use of the Confederate battle
flag" that violated his constitutional right to free speech.[^12] The
Associated Press reported that Ketchum, "seeks an order allowing the
campuswide \[sic\] sale, distribution, and display of the flag and
requiring an election among students to determine whether to officially
adopt the Confederate flag or any other banner as the school symbol."

The university denied having any sort of ban on the flag. They had
adopted no new official policies on student use of the flag since
Chancellor Fortune's announcement in 1982. However, they had prohibited
campus-run outlets from selling the flag and placed new limits on the
size of banners waved at school functions. The Ole Miss Students
Association had also taken steps to reduce the Confederate flag's use,
such as voting "to discourage use of the flag by alumni at school
functions" and adopting a new flag sporting the letter *M* as the new
official symbol.[^13]

In 1997, the 52-member University Associated Student Body voted to
discourage the waving of the Confederate flag at school events among the
student body. This decision aligned with calls being made by then
Chancellor Robert Khayat and football coach Tommy Tuberville for the
flag waving to cease.[^14]

As of 2023, Ole Miss sports teams are still using the label "the
Rebels."[^15]

*Olivia Haynie*

References

Associated Press. "Ole Miss denies impeding students' rights."
*Philadelphia Tribune*, Nov 12, 1991.

*Atlanta Daily World*. "Miss. Students Against Waving Confederate Flag."
Oct 31, 1997.

Daniel, Leon. "2 decades after Ole Miss riot Stars and Bars still wave."
*Afro-American* (Baltimore, MD), May 14 1983.

*Olemisssports.com* "Ole Miss Athletics," Accessed June 20, 2023,
https://olemisssports.com.

United Press International. "Black Students Protest Rebel Flag At Ole
Miss." *Atlanta Daily World*, Apr 22, 1983.

United Press International. "Oxford, Miss." *Carolina Times* (Durham,
NC), Sep 18, 1982.

United Press International. "Use of rebel flag stirs dispute at Ole
Miss." *Afro-American* (Baltimore, MD), Apr 30, 1983.

[^1]: United Press International. "Oxford, Miss." *Carolina Times*
    (Durham).

[^2]: United Press International. "Use of rebel flag stirs dispute at
    Ole Miss." *Afro-American* (Baltimore, MD).

[^3]: United Press International. "Black Students Protest Rebel Flag At
    Ole Miss." *Atlanta Daily World*,.

[^4]: United Press International. "Black Students Protest Rebel Flag At
    Ole Miss." *Atlanta Daily World*.

[^5]: United Press International. "Black Students Protest Rebel Flag At
    Ole Miss." *Atlanta Daily World*.

[^6]: Daniel, Leon. "2 decades after Ole Miss riot Stars and Bars still
    wave." *Afro-American* (Baltimore, MD).

[^7]: United Press International. "Black Students Protest Rebel Flag At
    Ole Miss." *Atlanta Daily World*.

[^8]: Daniel, Leon. "2 decades after Ole Miss riot Stars and Bars still
    wave." *Afro-American* (Baltimore, MD).

[^9]: United Press International. "Black Students Protest Rebel Flag At
    Ole Miss." *Atlanta Daily World*.

[^10]: United Press International. "Black Students Protest Rebel Flag At
    Ole Miss." *Atlanta Daily World*.

[^11]: United Press International. "Use of rebel flag stirs dispute at
    Ole Miss." *Afro-American* (Baltimore, MD).

[^12]: Associated Press. "Ole Miss denies impeding students' rights."
    *Philadelphia Tribune*.

[^13]: Associated Press. "Ole Miss denies impeding students' rights."
    *Philadelphia Tribune*.

[^14]: *Atlanta Daily World*. "Miss. Students Against Waving Confederate
    Flag."

[^15]: *Olemisssports.com* "Ole Miss Athletics."
