---
title: Jefferson Davis Stamp
---

No Churches for Judas and Pilate: Richard B. Martin on the Jefferson
Davis Postage Stamp Proposal

In 1960, a proposal was put forward to issue a postage stamp honoring
CSA president Jefferson Davis. In response, the *New Journal and Guide*
(Norfolk, VA) published a sharply critical editorial piece by the Rev.
Dr. Richard B. Martin.

Martin argued that Davis "wanted slavery everywhere," pointing out that
even before Secession, in "his first term in the Senate \[he\] fought to
have all of the territories opened to slavery."[^1] According to Martin,
Davis was also a "man of severe blunders" and "was not a good judge of
men and was constantly hampered by blunders in handling people."[^2]
Overall, he wrote, "Davis was a man controlled by strong pride and
prejudice."[^3]

Martin also discussed Davis's treason---his being "twice indicted" but
never convicted. "After General Lee," the article asserted, "Jeff Davis
is probably the second idiot in the minds of political leaders in the
South." Martin also expressed his frustration with the various
"commemorative Davis markers and monuments in several states and
numerous cities across the South." Martin's concluding line expressed
his deep hostility to Confederate commemoration, whether in monumental
or postage stamp form: "In the drama of the crucifixion of the Carpenter
of Nazareth, there are names like Judas and Pontius Pilate, but we don't
bother to name churches in their memory."

*Justin Seward*

References

Martin, Richard B. "Jeff Davis' Picture On U.S. Postage Stamps?" *New
Journal and Guide*, 06/18/1960, 8.

[^1]: Martin, Richard B., "Jeff Davis' Picture On U.S. Postage Stamps?"
    8.

[^2]: Martin, Richard B., "Jeff Davis' Picture On U.S. Postage Stamps?"
    8.

[^3]: Martin, Richard B., "Jeff Davis' Picture On U.S. Postage Stamps?"
    8.
