---
title: Fiery Crosses Symbolize a Revival on Stone Mountain
---

Fiery Crosses Symbolize a Revival on Stone Mountain

In 1945 and 1946 alone, at least five crosses were burned atop Stone
Mountain, the largest Confederate Monument in existence.[^1] These
cross-burnings signaled an attempt to revitalize the Ku Klux Klan using
the monument---with its colossal engraved portraits of Lee, Jackson, and
Davis---as a dramatic backdrop.

The faces carved on Stone Mountain far surpass the size of those carved
on Mount Rushmore. Not only that, whereas Mount Rushmore's location is
remote, Stone Mountain is located just a few miles outside Atlanta. The
*New York Age* reported that during World War II, cross burnings and
Klan organizing efforts were largely suppressed due to the need for
unity in winning the war. However, the Klan---well aware of its
historical successes in postwar periods---hoped that postwar racial
tensions would create favorable conditions for a resurgence.[^2]

Black newspapers across the country consistently reported the activities
of the Klan on Stone Mountain. The induction ceremonies of the Klan
involved cross burnings that could be seen from a distance of sixty
miles.[^3] These ceremonies attracted thousands of Klan sympathizers,
with participation sometimes exceeding 3,000 hooded members and 7,000
spectators.[^4] In 1945, an article from the *Pittsburgh Courier*
reported a membership of 30,000 across the South.[^5] An article from
the *Detroit Times* that same year stated that Georgia alone had 20,000
members, while the editor of the Negro News, C.W. Rice, drew on a
*Weekly Review* (AL) report of 25,000 members in that state.[^6] By the
end of May 1946, at least 700 new members had been initiated on top of
the mountain.[^7]

The response to this "vigorous organizing" of cross burnings on Stone
Mountain was highly critical, with accusations that a reign of terror
had emerged in the region.[^8] One account from the *Pittsburgh Courier*
reports, "Here in the center of a hotbed of Ku Klux Klan fanaticism, it
is evident that even God means nothing, as incendiarists have burned
down every negro church and school in the community."[^9] Some accounts
from the *Pittsburgh Courier* praised the actions of states like New
York and California for taking actions against the Klan's increased
organizing.[^10] Klan activities were seen as impeding progress in
diplomatic ambitions because it was embarrassing for the nation. As the
*Pittsburgh Courier* wrote: "The revival of the Ku Klux Klan weakens
America's position in the world... in the same way as the loss of a
major battle would do."[^11] Even groups like the Colored Funeral
Directors Association of Georgia condemned the Klan activities at Stone
Mountain, going on record to state, "\[We\] hereby deeply deplore and
strongly condemn the Ku Klux Klan in our state and urge our law
enforcement officers to counteract and prevent such barbaric and lawless
demonstrations that took place on Stone Mountain recently."[^12]

The *Cleveland Call* held nothing back in its coverage of the horrific
activities at the monument: "More than 700 white-sheeted Georgia
Crackers assembled last week atop historic Stone Mountain near here to
herald the rebirth of the notorious Ku Klux Klan, dedicated to 'white
supremacy.' The bigoted bed-sheeters held a 2-hour, torch-lighted
celebration a few hundred yards from the Confederate memorial which
never should have been built."[^13]

[^1]: Pittsburgh Courier, "Klan Burns Crosses; Labor Asks U.S. Probe,"
    14.

[^2]: New York Age, "Ku Klux Klan -- Enemy of Mankind," 2.

[^3]: Detroit Tribune, "Klan Renews Burning of Fiery Crosses," 1;
    Pittsburgh Courier, "Dixie Dailies Blast Klan Revival Attempt," 14.

[^4]: New York Age, "3000 Klansmen Meet in Georgia to Greet 700 Into
    Membership," 1.

[^5]: Pittsburgh Courier, "Dixie Dailies Blast Klan Revival Attempt,"
    14.

[^6]: Detroit Tribune, "Klan Renews Burning of Fiery Crosses," 1; Rice,
    "No Fear of K.K.K.," *Weekly Review*, 1.

[^7]: New York Age, "3000 Klansmen Meet in Georgia to Greet 700 Into
    Membership," 1; Pittsburgh Courier, "Klan Burns Crosses; Labor Asks
    U.S. Probe," 14.

[^8]: Pittsburgh Courier, "Nationwide Probe Dims Future of Ku Klux
    Klan," 13.

[^9]: Pittsburgh Courier, "Klan Blamed for Nazi-Like Tactics; 'Token'
    Probe On," 1.

[^10]: Pittsburgh Courier, "Nationwide Probe Dims Future of Ku Klux
    Klan," 13; Pittsburgh Courier, "Klan Burns Crosses; Labor Asks U.S.
    Probe," 14.

[^11]: Pittsburgh Courier, "Klan Burns Crosses; Labor Asks U.S. Probe,"
    14.

[^12]: Weekly Review, "Ga. Funeral Directors Against Revival of Klan,"
    2.

[^13]: Cleveland Call, "Ku Klux Burns Fiery Crosses to Signal Rebirth in
    Dixie," 12B.
