---
title: Georgia State Flag Controversy
---

# Georgia State Flag Controversy

In 1956, the Confederate Battle Flag was added to the state flag of
Georgia. This addition, according to an article by the *New Pittsburgh
Courier*, was directly prompted by lawmakers who were upset with the
1954 Brown vs Board of Education ruling. It was an act of retaliation
against what they saw as "forced integration."[^1]

In 1992, conflict over the flag came to a head when Governor Zell Miller
announced that he would be asking the state legislature to change the
flag. A report by the Associated Press (AP)---republished in the *New
Pittsburgh Courier*---stated that Gov. Miller was concerned that the
Confederate battle emblem would tarnish Georgia's international image
during the 1996 Olympics. He proposed changing the flag back to its
pre-1956 appearance: "a state seal on a blue field to the left, and red
and white horizontal bars on the right."[^2]

In response to this declaration, the following month, supporters of the
flag handed out literature, circulated petitions, and waved banners at a
forum for state legislators. Ray Harrelson, president of the Save the
Flag organization, told the AP that they would be delivering the
petitions to the Legislature in January. This AP report was then
reprinted by the *Philadelphia Tribune*.[^3]

Several days later, a group of about fifteen students burned the state
flag in front of Georgia's capitol building to signal their disapproval
of the Confederate emblem. The students, according to the AP, were
members of a group called Students for African American \[sic\]
Empowerment. One member, Lawrence Jeffries, stated, "Sherman came
through here and set Atlanta on fire. Today, we say burn, baby, burn."
Although agents of the Georgia Bureau of Investigation watched the
demonstration, no arrests were made.

The students also objected to the design proposed by Gov. Miller, as
they claimed it was based on the First National Flag of the Confederacy,
also known as the "Stars and Bars." The Georgia Civil Rights Network
petitioned for the state to go back to its pre-Civil War design: a blue
flag with the state seal in the middle.

A former governor of the state expressed outrage over the demonstration
and Gov. Miller's attempt to change the flag. He told the AP, "that flag
stands for the courage and heritage of our ancestors" and said Miller's
decision would "come home to haunt him."[^4]

The flag issue remained unresolved for years, but Black papers continued
to document the ongoing resistance to the Confederate design. An
editorial published in the *Atlanta Daily World* captured how the flag
affected Black Americans. The author, Mr. Bob Bradshaw, wrote,

> Each new day in, African American \[sic\] citizens of the state of
> Georgia are reminded of the not-to-distant \[sic\] past. They are
> reminded how they were not citizens but chattel...Change the symbol
> that churns up hate and hurls insult in the face of every African
> American in the United States, not just Georgia. Once that gets
> changed, we can maybe begin to change the hate in some peoples \[sic\]
> hearts to love and understanding as the good Lord intended.

Mr. Bradshaw also drew an analogy to Nazi commemoration after the
Holocaust: "Can you imagine Jewish people in Germany having to look and
see the Swastika flown as a symbol? I can't."[^5]

The *Bennett College Student Newspaper*, printed at a historically Black
college in North Carolina, drew a similar comparison in their own
editorial published a year later: "Government leaders in Atlanta
wouldn\'t dare flaunt Holocaust flags around their city. The Jewish
community would be an \[sic\] a uproar." The article continued, "I don't
understand why this is an issue at all because it shouldn't be. The flag
bothers us, so take it down. Plain and simple."[^6]

The *Atlanta Daily World* made sure to publish reports of local acts of
resistance. These included the Gwinnett Chamber of Commerce choosing to
fly the pre-1956 flag[^7] and the first Black sheriff of DeKalb County
replacing the station's state flag with a flag that represented the
department.[^8]

In 2001, the *Winston-Salem Chronicle* reprinted a National Newspaper
Publishers Association (NNPA) News Wire article announcing that the
Georgia State Senate had approved a new state flag design. (The NNPA is
a press association of over 200 Black owned newspapers from around the
United States.[^9]) The new flag had the state seal in the center with
five smaller flags printed below it, including all the past state flag
designs, the current American flag, and the Betsy Ross flag.[^10]

Reactions to the flag were mixed. An *Atlanta Daily World* report
captured the division within the Black community specifically; the
article quoted Black State Representative Calvin Smyre as saying "A
cloud has been lifted" in response to the vote. However, Markel
Hutchins, president of the National Youth Connection,[^11] an Atlanta
based group that supported Black youth, was less satisfied. According to
the same article, he declared he could not "salute the flag as long as
it has any semblance of the Confederacy."[^12]

In 2002, Sonny Perdue, "a poorly funded, unknown Republican," beat
Democratic incumbent Roy Barnes in the Georgia gubernatorial race,
becoming the first Republican governor of the state in 130 years. An AP
article reprinted in the *Winston-Salem Chronicle* attributed Perdue's
win in part to his promise to let Georgia citizens vote on the
flag.[^13]

Perdue, however, also took steps to prevent the inclusion of the 1956
flag as an option.[^14] The design that won was a new take on the
pre-1956 flag: two red bars with a white bar in the middle, but with a
square of blue in the top left corner. In that corner was the state seal
surrounded by a circle of stars.

References

Associated Press. "Georgia flag war continues." *Philadelphia Tribune*,
June 16, 1992.

Associated Press. "Gwinnett Flies Georgia Flag Sans Rebel Emblem."
*Atlanta Daily World*, April 27, 2000.

Associated Press. "Perdue Bans Old State Flag At Inauguration." *Atlanta
Daily World*, January 9, 2003.

*Atlanta Daily World*. "DeKalb Sheriff Retires State Flag Of Georgia."
March 6, 1997.

*Bennett College Student Newspaper* (Greensboro, NC)*.* "Confederate
flag; Take it down." February 24, 1994.

"Georgia Flag, Symbol Of Hate, Insults To Blacks Everywhere." *Atlanta
Daily World*, October 30, 1993.

Haines, Errin. "Boycott Averted As Senate Adopts New Georgia Flag:
Reaction To Compromise Is Mixed Among Local Activists." *Atlanta Daily
World*, February 1, 2001.

National Newspaper Publishers Association.
[[https://nnpa.org]{.underline}](https://nnpa.org)

NNPA News Wire. "Redesigned Georgia state flag has new emphasis."
*Winston-Salem Chronicle*, February 8, 2001

Ross, Sonya. "Atlanta Collegians Burn Georgia Flag To Protest
Confederate Problem." *New Pittsburgh Courier*, Jun 27, 1992.

Wyatt, Kristen "Flag threatens city's reputation." *Winston-Salem
Chronicle*, February 27, 2003.

[^1]: Ross, Sonya. "Atlanta Collegians Burn Georgia Flag To Protest
    Confederate Problem." *New Pittsburgh Courier*.

[^2]: Ross, Sonya. "Atlanta Collegians Burn Georgia Flag To Protest
    Confederate Problem." *New Pittsburgh Courier*.

[^3]: Associated Press. "Georgia flag war continues." *Philadelphia
    Tribune*.

[^4]: Ross, Sonya. "Atlanta Collegians Burn Georgia Flag To Protest
    Confederate Problem." *New Pittsburgh Courier*.

[^5]: "Georgia Flag, Symbol Of Hate, Insults To Blacks Everywhere."
    *Atlanta Daily World*.

[^6]: *Bennett College Student Newspaper* (Greensboro, NC)*.*
    "Confederate flag; Take it down."

[^7]: Associated Press. "Gwinnett Flies Georgia Flag Sans Rebel Emblem."
    *Atlanta Daily World*.

[^8]: *Atlanta Daily World*. "DeKalb Sheriff Retires State Flag Of
    Georgia."

[^9]: National Newspaper Publishers Association. https://nnpa.org

[^10]: NNPA News Wire. "Redesigned Georgia state flag has new emphasis."
    *Winston-Salem Chronicle*.

[^11]: The author of the article quoting Hutchins misprints the name of
    the group, calling it the "National Youth Coalition."

[^12]: Haines, Errin. "Boycott Averted As Senate Adopts New Georgia
    Flag: Reaction To Compromise Is Mixed Among Local Activists."
    *Atlanta Daily World*.

[^13]: Wyatt, Kristen "Flag threatens city's reputation." *Winston-Salem
    Chronicle*.

[^14]: Associated Press. "Perdue Bans Old State Flag At Inauguration."
    *Atlanta Daily World*.
