---
title: Head-to-Head with the Klan 
---

Taking the Fight against the Klan to Stone Mountain

In 1946, Drew Pearson---a popular white radio talk show host---went
head-to-head with the Klan shortly after the revitalization of the third
Klan at the summit of Stone Mountain.[^1] Calling the Klan a "Hitlerian
disease," he warned that Nazism was seeping into the United States
through religious intolerance, "creeping into our national
bloodstream."[^2]

Pearson continued his reporting on the "fly-by-night" activities of the
Klan, provoking a barrage of "letters threatening all sorts of dire
punishment." Pearson responded defiantly to these letters, writing "So
long as this typewriter has a ribbon, it will continue to expose the
nightshirt boys despite threats to bump off the operator."[^3] In
replying like this, he enraged the Klan even more.

One piece of hate mail, reported by Pearson in the *Weekly Review*,
"challenges me to come to Stone Mountain where 'We will have a killing
time.'" To this Pearson responded with an audacious plan: to bring his
popular nationwide broadcast to Stone Mountain itself. "I don't like to
disappoint anybody," he wrote, "not even the Klan, so I will come to
Stone Mountain... and I will broadcast from Stone Mountain what I think
of an order which peddles Hitler hate which is afraid to show its face
in public. They can show their faces at Stone Mountain if they
dare."[^4]

The Klan---unwilling to let their sacred Monument to the Confederacy be
used in this humiliating way---backed down, and the Klan-going Venable
family who owned Stone Mountain "notified him that they will not permit
a broadcast from the mountain top during which Pearson planned to
denounce the Ku Klux Klan."[^5]

Pearson never had the chance to broadcast on top of Stone Mountain, but
he continued attacking the Klan through his journalism, even delivering
a speech on the steps of the Georgia State Capitol lambasting the rise
of hate groups nationwide. The *Pittsburgh Courier* published the text
of this speech: "So Ku Klux Klanism and all the other isms which preach
hate are not merely the business of the South; they are the business of
the Nation. And as with Hitler, the time to stamp it out is now."

Pearson contended that the Confederate heroes idolized by the Klan would
be ashamed of the Klan actions done in their name, insisting that
"General Lee would have horsewhipped a grand dragon from his tent."
Finally, Pearson accused the Klan of being unchristian, stating that "On
Stone Mountain, the Klan talked of lynching other men. When Christ spoke
on a mountain, He spoke of loving other men. History reveres men of
goodwill. But history will ridicule and despise the fiery crosses on
Stone Mountain because the fiery cross break faith with the Cross on
Calvary."[^6]

[^1]: Time, "The Tenacious Muckraker."

[^2]: Drew Pearson - Hitlerian Diseases in USA Year After Germany\'s
    Defeat (1946 May 08)

[^3]: Drew Pearson - Pearson Lists Klan Activities Despite Threatening
    Letters (1946 Jun 03)

[^4]: Weekly Review - Klans Challenge Accepted By Daring Radio
    Commentator (1946 Jun 22)

[^5]: Tampa Bay Times - Drew Pearson Says He Can't Use Mountain (1946
    Jun 17)

[^6]: Drew Pearson - Hatred US Problem (1946 Jul 27) Part 1; Drew
    Pearson - Hatred US Problem (1946 Jul 27) Part 2
