Title: "Never Underestimate the Power of Symbols": The Jefferson Davis
Highway in Washington State

Author: Olivia Haynie

Location:
<https://www.google.com/maps/place/Blaine,+WA/@48.9766495,-122.8124543,12z/data=!3m1!4b1!4m6!3m5!1s0x5485c1359fb984e7:0x6ddc7f512f77d8cc!8m2!3d48.993723!4d-122.7471191!16zL20vMDEwdnBr?entry=ttu>

In 2002, the *Los Angeles Sentinel* reported on the efforts of a
Washington state lawmaker to rename a highway dedicated to Jefferson
Davis, the sole president of the CSA. The highway was christened the
Jefferson Davis Memorial Highway in 1939 and two markers were put up by
the United Daughters of the Confederacy in Blaine and Vancouver,
spanning the entire state. According to the *Sentinel*, this was part of
the UDC's project of building a Jefferson Davis Highway across the
entire country.[^1]

After Representative Hans Dunshee, a Democrat, noticed the marker near
the Washington-Canada border dedicating the highway to Davis, he
sponsored a bill to have the highway renamed for William P. Stewart, a
Black Union soldier who lived in Washington.

The bill passed the state House in a unanimous vote before being sent to
the Senate. But as the *Sentinel* reported, popular responses to the
proposal were far from unanimous. Responses to Dunshee's bill ranged
from protests to angry letters to threats of violence. Dunshee had to
ask the State Patrol to protect his family and told the *Sentinel* he
had "a live snake in \[his\] living room."[^2]

The controversy made waves beyond Washington. One woman from Florida
wrote to Dunshee, "I will have to come to Washington State and give you
what you deserve! I may be just a woman but I will slap and spit in your
stupid racist face."[^3]

Dunshee argued that a man who advocated for secession and slavery should
not be honored by the state. He believed that the marker instead
belonged in a museum, telling the *Sentinel* "It is critical we remove
that stamp of approval."[^4]

The *Sentinel* reported that although the bill was expected to easily
pass the Senate, some state lawmakers disagreed with Dunshee and many
locals expressed their opposition to the proposal. A local paper wrote a
statement chastising Dunshee, which the *Sentinel* reprinted in their
report. The *Herald* stated "Dunshee is making an issue where none
exists. It's not like this is the Deep South and there's a highway
dedicated to Ku Klux Klan founder Nathan Bedford Forrest."[^5] Marian
Harrison, a descendant of William P. Stewart, told the *Sentinel* that
she was not bothered by the Jefferson Davis Memorial Highway, but
thought a memorial to her ancestor should also be established.[^6]

Dunshee's bill died in the state Senate in March. This prompted the
NAACP and the Urban League to launch their own campaign to have the
highway renamed. The Associated Press (AP) wrote in an article
republished by the *New Pittsburgh Courier* that the civil rights groups
planned to distribute a petition and host a letter-writing campaign
addressing the state Senate and the committees who oversaw the state's
parks and roads.

Local NAACP President Oscar Eason stated, "To have anything named after
Jefferson Davis, particularly in the Northwest, is an insult to
African-Americans and how far we've come in this country toward healing
those wounds."[^7]

The effort transcended racial boundaries; Roberto Maestas, the executive
director of El Centro de la Raza, Seattle's Hispanic community center,
told the AP, "We must never underestimate the power of symbols."[^8]

It was not until 2016 that the situation finally changed. In March of
that year, the Washington State Legislature unanimously passed a bill
asking the state transportation commission to rename the highway as the
William P. Stewart Memorial Highway. That May, the commission agreed to
the proposition.

A transnational Jefferson Davis Highway did exist at one point in the
United States, starting in Arlington, Virginia and extending south and
west to San Diego, California. However, several states and towns it once
ran through have renamed their sections.[^9]

*Olivia Haynie*

References

Associated Press. "Davis monument removal campaign." *New Pittsburgh
Courier*, April 6, 2002.

Cook, Rebecca. "Effort to Rename Highway for Black Union Soldier Draws
Fire." *Los Angeles Sentinel*. February 21, 2002.

*Wikipedia.org*. "Jefferson Davis Highway." Accessed August 3, 2023.
Available at https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jefferson_Davis_Highway

[^1]: Cook, "Effort to Rename Highway for Black Union Soldier Draws
    Fire," *Los Angeles Sentinel*.

[^2]: Cook, "Effort to Rename Highway for Black Union Soldier Draws
    Fire," *Los Angeles Sentinel*.

[^3]: Cook, "Effort to Rename Highway for Black Union Soldier Draws
    Fire," *Los Angeles Sentinel*.

[^4]: Cook, "Effort to Rename Highway for Black Union Soldier Draws
    Fire," *Los Angeles Sentinel*.

[^5]: Cook, "Effort to Rename Highway for Black Union Soldier Draws
    Fire," *Los Angeles Sentinel*.

[^6]: Cook, "Effort to Rename Highway for Black Union Soldier Draws
    Fire," *Los Angeles Sentinel*.

[^7]: Associated Press, "Davis monument removal campaign," *New
    Pittsburgh Courier*.

[^8]: Associated Press, "Davis monument removal campaign," *New
    Pittsburgh Courier*.

[^9]: *Wikipedia.org*, "Jefferson Davis Highway."
