---
title: Killing of a Kentucky Teen Flying the Confederate Flag (1995)
author:
location: 
---
On January 14th 1995, nineteen-year-old Michael Westerman from Kentucky
was shot and killed while driving along the highway near Mississippi.
Seven Black teenagers were arrested and charged with the crime.[^1] Two
of them claimed they were provoked by the Confederate flag Westerman,
who was white, had attached to his truck.[^2]

Despite the fact that some teens cited the flag as provoking the act of
violence, the local community seemed to dismiss the idea that racial
tension was a driving factor. One Black resident, Martha Kay, told the
Associated Press that the flag was not the cause of the killing, and
instead blamed a drug culture she saw as pervading the local Black
community.[^3] A community meeting to address the perceived underlying
causes of the shooting focused on "parental failure to properly rear
their children and a lack of positive role models for teens."[^4]
According to the AP report, "few people of either race \[in Guthrie\]
are willing to talk publicly about any racial disharmony that may
exist."[^5]

Despite many members of the community insisting racial issues did not
affect their town, evidence suggests otherwise. At the time, Guthrie was
home to the majority of the Black population of Todd County, Kentucky,
which was made up mostly of descendants of slaves. Out of all the cities
in Kentucky with no Black elected officials, Guthrie had the largest
percentage of black residents (40). This situation was first reported by
the Kentucky Commission on Human Rights and picked up by the AP in their
reporting of the slaying.[^6]

*The Philadelphia Tribune* reported that some people did complain of
rising racial tensions. Todd County Central High School -- of which
Westerman was a graduate -- had a Confederate soldier as their
mascot.[^7] Despite recommendations made by a subcommittee that the
mascot be discarded after the killing, over 3,000 people signed a
petition insisting it remain in place. They ultimately got their
way.[^8] As of 2023, the school sports teams are still referred to as
"the Rebels."[^9]

After the shooting, there were both demonstrations of racial unity --
with Black and white residents holding joint prayer circles[^10] -- and
racial unrest -- as when a cross was burned on the lawn of an aunt of
one of the accused perpetrators in the weeks after the killing.[^11]
Although many community members publicly insisted that race was not at
issue in the killing, the town of Guthrie's response was to hire its
first Black police officer.[^12]

In their coverage of the incident, *The Winston-Salem Chronicle* and the
*Philadelphia Tribune,* mainly used reprints from the Associated Press,
while *The Atlanta Daily World* wrote up their own report on the
aftermath of the killing.

*Olivia Haynie*

References

Associated Press, "Burning follows shooting Ky. trouble starts with a
rebel flag," *Philadelphia Tribune.* January 27, 1995.

Associated Press, "Triad \[sic\] Set to Begin in Case with Racial
Undertones," *Winston-Salem Chronicle.* January 11, 1996.

*Atlanta Daily World.* "Kentucky Town Seeks Peace After Slaying,"
February 09, 1995.

*Philadelphia Tribune.* "Burning follows shooting Ky. trouble starts
with a rebel flag." Jan. 27, 1995.

Todd County School District. "GO REBELS -- Athletics -- Todd County,"
Accessed June 12, 2023,
https://www.todd.kyschools.us/apps/pages/index.jsp?uREC_ID=1566144&type=d&pREC_ID=1694325

[^1]: Associated Press, "Triad \[sic\] Set to Begin in Case with Racial
    Undertones," *Winston-Salem Chronicle.*

[^2]: *Atlanta Daily World.* "Kentucky Town Seeks Peace After Slaying."

[^3]: Associated Press, "Triad \[sic\] Set to Begin in Case with Racial
    Undertones," *Winston-Salem Chronicle.*

[^4]: *Atlanta Daily World* "Kentucky Town Seeks Peace After Slaying."

[^5]: Associated Press, "Triad \[sic\] Set to Begin in Case with Racial
    Undertones," *Winston-Salem Chronicle.*

[^6]: Associated Press, "Triad \[sic\] Set to Begin in Case with Racial
    Undertones," *Winston-Salem Chronicle.*

[^7]: Associated Press, "Burning follows shooting Ky. trouble starts
    with a rebel flag," *Philadelphia Tribune.*

[^8]: Associated Press, "Triad \[sic\] Set to Begin in Case with Racial
    Undertones," *Winston-Salem Chronicle.*

[^9]: Todd County School District. "GO REBELS -- Athletics -- Todd
    County."

[^10]: *Atlanta Daily World.* "Kentucky Town Seeks Peace After Slaying."

[^11]: *Philadelphia Tribune.* "Burning follows shooting Ky. trouble
    starts with a rebel flag."

[^12]: Associated Press, "Triad Set to Begin in Case with Racial
    Undertones," *Winston-Salem Chronicle.*
