---
title: Klan Claims to be a Local Organization
---

Black Journalists Systematically Challenge Klan Claims to Be a "Local"
Organization

Black reporters covering the revival of the Ku Klux Klan on top of the
Confederate memorial at Stone Mountain, GA, noted that the Klan
consistently used a distinct rhetorical technique: identifying
themselves and their issues as "local," even when they were anything
but. The *Pittsburgh Courier* reported that the Klan leadership claimed
their "activities... are inspired by local organizations and cannot be
linked up with any national program." The cross burnings and
initiations, as the *Pittsburgh Courier* put it, were told to be "purely
local."[^1]

Likewise, the *Cleveland Call and Post* reported that the "Grand Dragon"
Dr. Samuel Green "said the demonstration was strictly a Georgia affair,"
although he admits that "many members attended from neighboring states."
The *Cleveland Call and Post* wrote that there were 11 buses that bore
license plates from states like Maryland and Tennessee and that there
were hundreds of cars that lined the road all the way to Stone
Mountain.[^2] The *New York Age* reported that "chartered buses brought
in Klansmen from Alabama, Tennessee, Florida... license plates on
private automobiles indicated attendance was from 14 states."[^3] The
*Pittsburgh Courier* reported in another article that busloads of
Tennesseans from across the state were at the Stone Mountain cross
burning on May 10^th^, 1946.[^4]

Black journalists investigating the Klan documented both the Klan's
rhetorical techniques and the interstate networks that made white
supremacist networks possible.

*Justin Seward*

Facing History & Ourselves. "The Role of Carpetbaggers." *Facing History
& Ourselves*, 05/20/2020.
<https://www.facinghistory.org/resource-library/role-carpetbaggers>

King. "Letter from Birmingham Jail." *Penguin Classics*, 2018.

Pittsburgh Courier. "Dixie Dailies Blast Klan Revival Attempt."
*Pittsburgh Courier*, 11/03/1945, 14.

Cleveland Call and Post. "Ku Klux Burns Fiery Crosses To Signal Rebirth
in Dixie." *Cleveland Call and Post*, 05/18/1946, 12B.

New York Age. "3000 Klansmen Meet in Georgia To Greet 700 Into
Membership." *New York Age*, 07/31/1948, 1.

Pittsburgh Courier. "East Tennesseans Attend Klan Rites." *Pittsburgh
Courier*, 05/25/1946, 2.

[^1]: Pittsburgh Courier, "Dixie Dailies Blast Klan Revival Attempt,"
    14.

[^2]: Cleveland Call and Post, "Ku Klux Burns Fiery Crosses To Signal
    Rebirth in Dixie," 12B.

[^3]: New York Age, "3000 Klansmen Meet in Georgia To Greet 700 Into
    Membership," 1.

[^4]: Pittsburgh Courier, "East Tennesseans Attend Klan Rites," 2.
