---
title: Let Stone Mountain Alone
---

# "Let Stone Mountain Alone"

There were three distinct waves of construction at Stone Mountain. The
first wave began in 1915 when Helen Plane suggested carving a small
monument to Lee in the mountain.[^1] Soon after, Gutzon Borglum---the Ku
Klux Klan affiliate who would later become the chief sculptor of Mount
Rushmore---was contracted to begin the work; his proposal was for a
literal army of carvings depicting every major Confederate leader.[^2]

The second wave began in 1925 when Augustus Lukeman was contracted to
head the operation, dramatically revising the existing plans and
blasting Borglum's work off the mountain.[^3] The third wave commenced
in 1964 after the state of Georgia bought Stone Mountain and appointed
George Weiblen as superintendent of the carvers.[^4] This culminated in
an official dedication in 1970, with vice-president Spiro T. Agnew
offering the guest oration.[^5]

![](media/image1.png){width="1.5334667541557305in"
height="5.3046259842519685in"}

Tampa Bay Times, "Vice President Agnew at Stone Mountain," 2.

The monument's history---and the mountain itself---were deeply tied up
with the rebirth of the Ku Klux Klan in the early 20^th^ century. Each
wave of construction of the monument was marked by special interest
among Black newspapers, who in addition to their blunt criticism of the
project took particular care to note mismanagement, controversy, and
corruption attending the process.

In 2000, the *Atlanta Daily World* commented on the construction in an
article looking back at the controversial 85-year history, identifying
it as a "Lost Cause shrine." The author specifically highlighted the
monument's links to Confederate identity: "In 1915, Helen Plane, widow
of a surgeon in the Confederate army and president of the Atlanta
chapter of the United Daughters of the Confederacy, proposed a
10-foot-wide statue of Lee's head."[^6] The *Kansas City Sun* also wrote
about Plane's dream of what the mountain could be, noting that she "sent
for Gutzon Borglum, the sculptor, to come to Georgia, to consider the
feasibility of a great sculptural monument to the Confederacy on the
wall of the mountain." The *Atlanta Daily World* piece also pointed out
that Borglum expressed skepticism toward the scale of the project.[^7]

But Borglum returned with big plans, proposing an image of an army
depicting every Confederate leader.[^8] Illustrations and a detailed
description of what the monument at Stone Mountain could look like were
published in 1914 by the *Philadelphia Inquirer* (which also provides
evidence that the idea for carving the mountain was already in the air
before Plane's initiatives). Borglum's involvement was halted in 1925
when funding ran dry.

![A black and white photo of a person standing next to a metal structure
Description automatically
generated](media/image2.png){width="2.558555336832896in"
height="4.387880577427821in"}

*Philadelphia Inquirer*, "A Mountain to Serve as a Monument."

Black newspapers frequently denounced the monument in its early days. In
1924, the *Chicago Defender* republished statements made by speakers at
the dedication of a memorial to Abraham Lincoln. For instance, Rev.
Charles L. Shergur, the chaplain of the Grand Army of the Republic,
referred to "the Stone Mountain memorial in Georgia to confederate
leaders as a 'monument to treason,' which would soon be forgotten, while
the memorials to Lincoln would live." Of the Klansmen supporting the
memorial at Stone Mountain, he said, "This unnatural and un-American
collection of mongrels must be destroyed for the good of the
country."[^9]

The *Chicago Defender* published an article discussing the construction
of the memorial in 1923,

"Gutzen \[sic\] Borglum, noted sculptor, promises to draw on the side of
Stone Mountain in Georgia a tribute to the Confederate soldiers that
will overshadow every other memorial in the world... The mountain will
extend a thousand feet and more across the face of the mountain. Lee and
Jackson will be seen standing reviewing the Confederate armies.
Jefferson Davis will be carved looking down on his two heroes."

The *Defender* editors wryly added: "Very pretty, but don't let that
worry you. Whatever may be written on the side of Stone Mountain will
not disturb the Emancipation Proclamation." They also attacked what they
saw as the corrupt culture responsible for the monument: "The South,
home of determined unforgetting, unforgiving people, is behind this
monument to the Lost Cause."[^10]

Similarly, the *Pittsburgh Courier* published an article in 1925
decrying the construction of Stone Mountain:

"The South, aided by an obsession that the Rebellion was right and the
abolition of Negro slavery wrong, decided to have carved on the face of
Stone Mountain a living reminder of the cause to which they have
dedicated their lives reminder of the cause to which they have dedicated
their lives: human slavery and color selfishness. They hired a sculptor
to carve the sign of rebellion on the mountains of Georgia, where
passersby, in all the coming years, might know that the South believes
in human slavery, and gave it up only at the point of the gun."

The article concluded with a blunt prescription: "Just enough work has
been done to remind the traveler that 'there is the lost cause,
conceived in hatred, and interrupted in its course for want of support.'
Nothing could constitute a more appropriate insignia to a lost cause
than an unfinished monument halted in its rise for want of sympathy. Let
Stone Mountain alone."[^11]

References

*Pittsburgh Courier*. "The Stone Mountain Jinx." *Pittsburgh Courier*,
08/27/1927, 20.

*Pittsburgh Courier*. "Let Stone Mountain Alone." *Pittsburgh Courier*,
02/28/1925, 20.

*New York World.* "Stone Mountain." *New York World*, 01/13/1925, 28.

*Kansas City Sun*. "Stone Mountain." *Kansas City Sun*, 09/09/1921, 4.

*Chicago Defender*. "Rebel Image on Mountain Criticized." *Chicago
Defender*, 08/1924/23, 2.

Schwartz, Jerry. "Stone Mountain Is a Many-Faceted Tourist Attraction
and Lost Cause Shrine." *Atlanta Daily world*, 01/06/2000, 4.

Scott. "Memorial Plaza Dedication Today at Stone Mountain." *Atlanta
Daily World*, 04/23/1974, 10.

Simmons. "The Week." *Chicago Defender*, 04/28/1923, 13.

Piper. "Stone Mountain: Maj. Tucker Says, 'It Will Crack'." *Tampa Bay
Times*, 05/09/1970, 25.

Johnson, Kathryn. "They're Carving Up Old Stone Mountain." *Tampa Bay
Times*, 06/19/1966, 59.

*Tampa Bay Times*. "New Beginning for Stone Mountain Monument," *Tampa
Bay Times*, 12/15/1925, 61.

*Tampa Bay Times*. "New Stone Mountain Memorial Design." *Tampa Bay
Times*, 09/13/1925, 55.

*Tampa Bay Times*. "Remodeling Stone Mountain." *Tampa Bay Times*,
06/27/1925, 16.

*Tampa Bay Times*. "Stone Mountain---Where History Comes Alive." *Tampa
Bay Times*, 02/16/1970, 110.

*Tampa Bay Times.* "Vice President Agnew at Stone Mountain." *Tampa Bay
Times*, 05/10/1970, 2.

*Tampa Bay Times*. "A Mountain to Serve as a Monument." *Tampa Bay
Times*, 09/13/1914, 54.

*Tampa Bay Times*. "Stone Mountain Sculptor Assails Memorial Members."
*Tampa Bay Times*, 02/22/1925, 1.

*Tampa Bay Times*. "Stone Mount Probe Asked." *Tampa Bay Times*,
09/03/1927, 8.

*Tampa Bay Times*. "Stone Mountain Friend Demands His Money Back."
*Tampa Bay Times*, 04/29/1925, 1.

[^1]: Schwartz, Jerry, "Stone Mountain is a Many-Faceted Tourist
    Attraction and Lost Cause Shrine," 4.

[^2]: *Kansas City Sun*, "Stone Mountain," 4.

[^3]: *Pittsburgh Courier*, "The Stone Mountain Jinx," 20; *Tampa Bay
    Times*, "New Stone Mountain Memorial Design," 55.

[^4]: *Tampa Bay Times*, "They're Carving Up Old Stone Mountain," 59.

[^5]: Schwartz, Jerry, "Stone Mountain is a Many-Faceted Tourist
    Attraction and Lost Cause Shrine," 4; *Tampa Bay Times*, "Vice
    President Agnew at Stone Mountain," 2.

[^6]: Schwartz, Jerry, "Stone Mountain is a Many-Faceted Tourist
    Attraction and Lost Cause Shrine," 4.

[^7]: Schwartz, Jerry, "Stone Mountain is a Many-Faceted Tourist
    Attraction and Lost Cause Shrine," 4.

[^8]: Kansas City Sun, "Stone Mountain," 4.

[^9]: Chicago Defender, "Rebel Image on Mountain Criticized," 2.

[^10]: Chicago Defender, "The Week," 13.

[^11]: Pittsburgh Courier, "Let Stone Mountain Alone," 20.
