---
title: Monument Ave -- Davis
---

"Fear God, Tell Truth, and Make Money" -- A Lack of Journalistic
Interest in the Davis Monument on Monument Avenue

In 1907, A monument to Jefferson Davis, President of the CSA, was
unveiled on Monument Avenue in Richmond. This followed the erection of a
massive statue of General Robert E. Lee in 1890 and a monument to J.E.B.
Stuart just 4 days prior. The creation of the Davis monument---as grand
as it was---resulted in very little notice among Black journalists.
Black newspapers published no editorials on the unveiling of the Davis
monument, but two of them offered minimal coverage.

The *Washington Bee* published an article simply stating that the
"statue of Jefferson Davis was unveiled last Monday." They also noted
why the trains were stopped: "At the request of Gen. Stephen D. Lee all
trains on the Atlanta and West Point Railroat \[sic\] were stopped last
Monday afternoon for five minutes in honor of the unveiling of the
Jefferson Davis Monhment \[sic\]."[^1]

The *Bystander* (known at that time as the *Iowa State Bystander*)
republished an Associated Press report about the unveiling in Richmond,
as well. This article seems to speak favorably of the proceedings,
describing how "Under a perfect sky... the armies of gray passed through
the streets of Richmond Monday and, out on splendid Monument Avenue,
unveiled an enduring memorial to Jefferson Davis."[^2] It seems that the
*Bystander* shortened the original AP article several days after it
first appeared in print in mainstream newspapers, although the title of
the *Bystander* piece--- "Davis Statue Unveiled"---is more neutral in
tone than that chosen by other venues like the *Daily Press* (Newport,
VA), which went with "Splendid Memorial to South's Great Leader" or the
*Montgomery Advertiser* (Montgomery, AL) which ran their version under
the title "South Sets Aside Eternal Shaft to Perpetuate Dead Leader's
Fame."[^3] It may also be the case that the *Bystander* picked up the
story with little intent to offer political commentary; the Bystander
Publishing Company's motto, after all, was "Fear God, Tell the Truth,
and Make Money."[^4]

*Justin Seward*

References

*Washington Bee*. "The Statue of Jefferson Davis." *Washington Bee*,
06/08/1907, 1.

*Iowa State Bystander*. "Davis Statue Unveiled." *Iowa State Bystander*,
06/08/1907, 1.

*Daily Press*. "Splendid Memorial to South's Great Leader." *Daily
Press*, 06/04/1907, 1.

*Birmingham Age-Herald*. "Unveil Memorial to President of Confederacy."
*Birmingham Age-Herald*, 06/04/1907, 1.

*Montgomery Advertiser*. "South Sets Aside Eternal Shaft to Perpetuate
Dead Leader's Fame." *Montgomery Advertiser*, 06/04/1907, 1.

Library of Congress. "About Iowa State Bystander." Iowa State Bystander
Pub. Co. Accessed August 10, 2023.
https://chroniclingamerica.loc.gov/lccn/sn83025186/.

[^1]: *Washington Bee*, "The Statue of Jefferson Davis," 1.

[^2]: *Iowa State Bystander*, "Davis Statue Unveiled," 2.

[^3]: *Daily Press*, "Splendid Memorial to South's Great Leader," 1;
    *Birmingham Age-Herald*, "Unveil Memorial to President of
    Confederacy," 1; *Montgomery Advertiser*, "South Sets Aside Eternal
    Shaft to Perpetuate Dead Leader's Fame," 1.

[^4]: Library of Congress, "About Iowa State Bystander."
