---
title: Removal of the Confederate Flag from the S.C. Statehouse
---

# Removal of the Confederate Flag from the S.C. Statehouse

On June 23, 2015, nine Black worshippers were murdered in a racially
motivated attack on the Emanuel African Methodist Episcopal Church in
Charleston, South Carolina.

Prior to the shooting, the gunman, Dylann Roof, had posted photos of
himself online brandishing the Confederate flag and burning or defiling
United States flags.[^1] In the wake of the attack and the circulation
of these photos, new attention was brought to the Confederate flag
flying on statehouse grounds in Columbia, S.C.

The *Winston-Salem Chronicle* covered this controversy closely, in part
by publishing Associated Press (AP) reports, editorials, and cartoons.
These articles provided the timeline of events and captured both sides
of the flag issue. But the *Chronicle* also published editorials which
vividly demonstrated how many African-Americans saw the future of the
flag tied up with the future of equality in the U.S.

One editorial, written by U.S. Representative Alma S. Adams (NC-12)
published in the *Chronicle* two days after the shooting, suggested that
in response to the shooting, "we should put our faith to action, making
a conscious decision to be more than empty drums that have long lost
their melodies." Adams continued,

> In South Carolina, the Confederate flag -- an unequivocal symbol of
> hate -- remains on statehouse grounds. We must demand the flag be
> removed immediately -- we cannot let icons of racism fly free within
> our society.[^2]

That same day, the *Chronicle* published another editorial calling for
the removal of the flag. The author, Mr. James B. Ewers Jr., called the
flag a symbol of slavery and remarked that "it is difficult for me to
see how justice and equality can prevail when there is a symbol of
injustice that serves as a constant reminder." If South Carolina wanted
to make progress on race relations following the shooting, he argued,
the flag needed to come down.[^3]

A cartoon by African-American illustrator Ron Rogers, also printed in
the *Chronicle*, expressed a similar criticism. The cartoon depicts a
jail cell, the bars of which have been ripped open. The cell is labeled
"Racism, Hate," suggesting these were the occupants that had broken
free. A Confederate flag flies atop the cell. In front of the cell two
men stand guard, with one saying to the other "I thought we had this
under control." The cartoon mocks the notion that any place that flies
the Confederate flag has successfully tamed the powers of racism and
hate.[^4]

![](media/image1.jpg){width="6.5in" height="5.152777777777778in"}

The governor of South Carolina quickly joined the call for the flag's
removal. According to an AP report reprinted in the *Chronicle*,
Governor Nikki Haley proclaimed that the flag's use as a hate symbol by
Roof "made it too divisive to display in such a public space." Haley
remarked that she hoped removing the flag would allow the state to "move
forward in harmony."

Although she acknowledged the hateful way Roof had used the flag, Haley
resisted labeling the flag itself as an inherently bigoted symbol. She
stated,

> For many people in our state, the flag stands for traditions that are
> noble. The hate-filled murderer who massacred our brothers and sisters
> in Charleston has a sick and twisted view of the flag. In no way does
> he reflect the people in our state who respect, and in many ways,
> revere it.

This opinion was echoed by the head of the South Carolina branch of the
Sons of Confederate veterans in a statement that was partially printed
in the same AP report in the *Chronicle*. Mr. Land Summers asked the
public to not "associate the cowardly actions of a racist to our
Confederate Banner. There is absolutely no link between The Charleston
Massacre and The Confederate Memorial Banner. Don't try to create one."

On July 6, the South Carolina Senate voted 37-3 in favor of removal.
According to the AP report on the vote, several white senators who had
once supported the flag's presence on Statehouse grounds, stated that
they now understood "why their black colleagues felt the flag no longer
represented the valor of Southern soldiers" but the brutality and racism
of slavery.

It was also up for discussion whether or not the pole itself would
remain standing. House Minority Leader Todd Rutherford, D-Columbia,
expressed fear that any flag raised to the Confederate soldiers monument
would become "the new vestige of racism."[^5] On July 9, the South
Carolina State House also voted in favor of the flag's removal and on
July 10, the flag was officially taken down.[^6]

The *Winston-Salem Chronicle* reprinted a statement from U.S.
Representative G. K. Butterfield (NC-1), Chairman of the Congressional
Black Caucus, applauding South Carolina for lowering of the flag.
Butterfield referred to the action as part of "progress towards a
brighter future."[^7]

Not everyone agreed that the flag's removal indicated meaningful change.
An AP article on the matter, reprinted in the *Winston-Salem Chronicle*,
noted that Rev. Joseph Darby, a friend of one of the nine slain at
Emanuel AME, thought it "a bit premature to declare this a new 'New
South,' as some commentators have suggested." Darby said he was hopeful
it would be a first step in a journey towards bringing about real
equality and justice, but asserted, "if nothing else changes, it'll
ultimately be cosmetic."[^8]

When Former Governor Haley began her presidential campaign in 2023, news
outlets like *Time Magazine* and the *Washington Post* began to
speculate on how her past comments on the flag could affect her election
chances. She received criticism from conservatives for her decision to
remove the flag and from liberals for her refusal to condemn the flag
itself, instead condemning how Roof used it. *Time* reported the issue
would likely come up multiple times over the course of her run.[^9]

References

Adams, Alma S.. "Stand Against Evil Acts Of Violence and Hate."
*Winston-Salem Chronicle*, June 25, 2015.

Adcox, Seanna, et al. "S.C. Governor Calls on Removal of Confederate
Flag From Statehouse Grounds." *Winston-Salem Chronicle*, June 25, 2015.

Breed, Allen G. and Reeves, Jay. "Time Will Tell If Furling The Rebel
Flag Means Deeper Change." *Winston-Salem Chronicle*, July 2, 2015.

Butterfield, G. K.. "CBC applauds S.C. vote to remove flag from
grounds." *Winston-Salem Chronicle,* July 16, 2015.

Collins, Jeffrey. "37-3 S.C. Senate gives final OK to removal of the
Confederate flag." *Winston-Salem Chronicle*, July 9, 2015.

Ewers Jr., James B.. "The Killings in South Carolina are a setback in
American race relations." *Winston-Salem Chronicle*, June 25, 2015.

Racker, Mini. "The Role Nikki Haley\'s 2015 Decision to Remove the
Confederate Flag Could Play in Her Presidential Run." *Time Magazine,*
February 14, 2023.
https://time.com/6255503/nikki-haley-2024-confederate-flag/#:\~:text=After%20the%20service%2C%20Haley%20told,how%20many%20would%20show%20up.

Rogers, Ron. "Untitled." *Winston-Salem Chronicle,* June 25, 2015.

*Wikipedia.* "Charleston church shooting." Accessed on July 19, 2023.

[^1]: Adcox, Seanna, et al. "S.C. Governor Calls on Removal of
    Confederate Flag From Statehouse Grounds." *Winston-Salem
    Chronicle*.

[^2]: Adams, Alma S.. "Stand Against Evil Acts Of Violence and Hate."
    *Winston-Salem Chronicle*.

[^3]: Ewers Jr., James B.. "The Killings in South Carolina are a setback
    in American race relations." *Winston-Salem Chronicle*.

[^4]: Rogers, Ron. "Untitled." *Winston-Salem Chronicle*.

[^5]: Collins, Jeffrey. "37-3 S.C. Senate gives final OK to removal of
    the Confederate flag." *Winston-Salem Chronicle*.

[^6]: *Wikipedia.* "Charleston church shooting."

[^7]: Butterfield, G. K.. "CBC applauds S.C. vote to remove flag from
    grounds." *Winston-Salem Chronicle*.

[^8]: Breed, Allen G. and Reeves, Jay. "Time Will Tell If Furling The
    Rebel Flag Means Deeper Change." *Winston-Salem Chronicle*.

[^9]: Racker, Mini. "The Role Nikki Haley\'s 2015 Decision to Remove the
    Confederate Flag Could Play in Her Presidential Run." *Time
    Magazine.*
