---
title: The Rise and Fall of "Silent Sam"
author: Olivia Haynie
topic: Monuments and Locations
lat: 35.9140955
long: -79.0550272
location: <https://www.google.com/maps/place/Silent+Sam/@35.9140955,-79.0550272,17z/data=!3m1!4b1!4m6!3m5!1s0x89acc3113ecfa55d:0x39d881f269417498!8m2!3d35.9140912!4d-79.0524523!16zL20vMDY0NjFw?entry=ttu>
---
The statue that came to be known as "Silent Sam" was erected at the
University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill (UNC) in 1913 and dedicated to
the memory of UNC students who had died fighting for the Confederacy
during the Civil War half a century earlier. The statue depicts a
Confederate soldier in the at-ready position---gun in hand---but without
an ammunition box. Over the years, Silent Sam became the nexus for many
demonstrations about racial issues.[^1] The *Winston-Salem Chronicle*
took a special interest in the statue and kept readers up to date with
the controversy by reprinting a string of Associated Press articles in
the 2010s.

On July 9, 2015, the *Chronicle* republished an AP report covering an
incident of vandalism of the statue over the weekend. An unidentified
individual had spray-painted the words "murderer" and "black lives
matter" on the monument.[^2]

In November of that same year, the *Chronicle* reprinted another AP
article reporting that UNC students had interrupted a university meeting
on race relations, chanting "Whose university? Our university!" The
students made several demands pertaining to racial issues on campus,
including the removal of the Silent Sam monument. The AP report noted
that a university task force had already made plans to place markers on
McCorkle Place, where the statue was located, to provide the monument's
full historical context. However, this plan did not include removal of
the monument itself.[^3]

According to the AP, although many students, faculty, and alumni called
for the statue's removal, condemning it as a racist symbol, Chancellor
Carol Folt and other UNC leaders claimed a state law prevented the
school from removing the statue.[^4] The law she referenced was the 2015
Cultural History Artifact Management and Patriotism Act, requiring the
approval of the General Assembly for the removal of any monuments on
public property that commemorate "an event, a person or military service
that is part of North Carolina's history." [^5]

Finally, students took matters into their own hands. On Monday, August
20, 2018---one year after the deadly Unite the Right riots in
Charlottesville, VA---students toppled the memorial during a rally for
its removal, bringing an end to Silent Sam's presence on campus.[^6]

The remains of the statue were initially moved to storage. In November
of 2019, UNC agreed to donate Silent Sam to the Sons of Confederate
Veterans, along with \$2.5 million for the costs of its preservation and
display. This agreement was made public minutes after the SCV filed a
lawsuit against the University for possession of the statue.

However, in 2020, a judge overturned the settlement, arguing that the
group had "lacked standing to bring its lawsuit in the first place." The
statue was returned to the UNC system and was still in storage as of
this writing in 2023.[^7]

*Olivia Haynie*

**References**

Associated Press. "UNC's 'Silent Sam' Confederate statue vandalized."
*Winston-Salem Chronicle,* July 9, 2015.

Associated Press. "UNC students disrupt race meeting." *Winston-Salem
Chronicle,* November 26, 2015.

Luck, Todd. "Who owns this statue?" *Winston-Salem Chronicle*, July 23,
2015.

*Winston-Salem Chronicle*. "Protesters topple Confederate UNC statue."
August 23, 2018.

Wamsley, Laurel. "Judge Voids UNC's Controversial Settlement Over
Confederate Statue 'Silent Sam'." *npr.org*, February 12, 2020.
Available at
https://www.npr.org/2020/02/12/805250903/judge-voids-uncs-controversial-settlement-over-confederate-statue-silent-sam

[^1]: Associated Press, "UNC's 'Silent Sam' Confederate statue
    vandalized," *Winston-Salem Chronicle*.

[^2]: Associated Press, "UNC's 'Silent Sam' Confederate statue
    vandalized," *Winston-Salem Chronicle*.

[^3]: Associated Press, "UNC students disrupt race meeting,"
    *Winston-Salem Chronicle*.

[^4]: *Winston-Salem Chronicle*, "Protesters topple Confederate UNC
    statue," August 23, 2018.

[^5]: Luck, "Who owns this statue?" *Winston-Salem Chronicle*.

[^6]: *Winston-Salem Chronicle*, "Protesters topple Confederate UNC
    statue," August 23, 2018.

[^7]: Wamsley, "Judge Voids UNC's Controversial Settlement Over
    Confederate Statue 'Silent Sam'," *npr.org*.
