---
title: Singing "Dixie"
---

# Singing "Dixie"

During the US Civil War, the popular mid-nineteenth-century minstrel
song "Dixie" emerged as an unofficial national anthem of the
Confederacy. The singing of "Dixie" became a regular occurrence at
events and public gatherings, a tradition that continued after the
defeat of the CSA.

While the song could be heard in a variety of contexts, much of the
controversy reported on in Black newspapers surrounded the use of the
song in schools, especially colleges and universities. The coverage of
these disputes was largely generated by United Press International (UPI)
reports that were reprinted by Black newspapers.

In an editorial for the *New York Amsterdam News*, American civil rights
leader and social worker Whitney M. Young Jr. covered the issue as part
of a report on his experience of traveling around the South. He claimed
that at many Southern school events "all students, black and white, are
expected to stand and sing along to the tune the soldiers of the South
marched to in their war to preserve slavery." Young argued that that
song symbolized the "whip and the lash" of slavery and proclaimed: "What
is appropriate for a Klan is not appropriate for a school assembly."[^1]

In 1967, the *Afro-American* reprinted a UPI report of a state
resolution in Alabama requiring all state-supported colleges and
universities to play "Dixie" alongside the national anthem and state
song at school events. The act was signed by Governor Lurleen Wallace.
The motion also ordered the Confederate flag be waved alongside the
American and state flags while the anthems were played.[^2]

Quite often, controversy around "Dixie" arose alongside controversy
around the Confederate flag as a school symbol. In Florida the following
year, *New Journal and Guide* reprinted a UPI report on the University
of Miami's move to prohibit the school band from playing "Dixie" and
discourage the waving of Confederate flags at sports games. The order
was made by university president Dr. Henry King, a self-described
"genuine Southerner," according to the UPI. King declared, "It is not
honorable to force upon a minority group the symbol of the Confederacy
which, rightly or wrongly, have become so distasteful to them."

In 1969, another UPI report reprinted in the *Afro-American* documented
the activism of a Black student group at the University of South
Carolina who demanded a ban on the playing of "Dixie" and the waving of
the Confederate flag at school sports games. They referred to the
tradition as a "tribute to a movement that sought to destroy the United
States...\[and\] a tribute to the peculiar institution that enslaved
human beings."[^3]

Controversy around "Dixie" did not just affect institutions of higher
education. In the fall of 1970, at the recently desegregated Strom
Thurmond High School in South Carolina, ten Black members of the
football team (nicknamed the "Rebels") left the squad in protest of the
singing of "Dixie" and the waving of the Confederate flag. Other
students, including the school band, two cheerleaders, and a majorette
were also reported by the UPI to have staged a protest, although details
of this protest were not included in the article.[^4]

Conflict over the song at Anniston High School in Alabama prompted
action from an official of the NAACP. Their Associate Director of Voter
Education, W.C. Patton, asked state education officials to stop the
playing of the song at school activities immediately. Part of a letter
Mr. Patton wrote to Alabama's Superintendent of Education was published
in the *Philadelphia Tribune*'s report on the incident. Mr. Patton
argued that division within America can never be overcome "if any
segment continues to employ acts which seek to reopen wounds of racial
bigotry."[^5]

While most of the gathered articles about "Dixie" dealt with schools, a
few demonstrated how "Dixie" was used outside of educational
institutions. The *Winston-Salem Chronicle* reported that "Dixie" was
played at the funeral for Byron De La Beckwith, the killer of civil
rights leader Medgar Evers. In attendance were his family and local
Klansmen.[^6] The *Carolina Times* noted that the song was played for a
unit of the Alabama Fourth Heavy Howitzer Battalion to celebrate their
return from the Korean war. The outfit's band played "Dixie" as the
transport arrived in Washington D.C.[^7]

In Alabama, it was tradition for "Dixie" to be played during the
inauguration celebrations of state governors. However, at Gov. Lurleen
Wallace's inaugural parade in 1967, the Black school bands in attendance
refused to play the song. The NPI reported that "rather than playing
'Dixie' and other tunes dear to the hearts of racists," as the white
bands did, "the Negro bands played such patriotic tunes as 'Stars and
Stripes Forever.'" One Black high school band from Butler County played
the "Batman" theme song as they passed the newly inaugurated
governor.[^8]

In the 1980's and 90's, the NAACP continued efforts to prohibit the
singing of "Dixie," along with the waving of the Confederate flag, from
official and public events, often meeting local resistance, according to
a report in the *Charlotte Post*. The *Post* reprinted an editorial
letter responding to this endeavor originally printed in *The Charlotte
Observer*. The letter, written by a Mr. Larry Walker was titled, "Pride
in Confederacy Not Racist." In it, Mr. Walker called the NAACP,
"asinine, ignorant individuals for incorrectly labeling the heroes and
patriots of the Confederacy as racist monsters," as phrased by the
*Post*. Mr. Walker was quoted as writing that the

> Confederate flag and the singing of Dixie are representative of the
> awesome sacrifices made by Southern men and women to maintain the same
> principles of self-identity and self government \[sic\] for which the
> rebels of the colonies seceded from the British Empire in 1776.[^9]

*Olivia Haynie*

References

Boulware, Marcus H.. "Boulware's Yes...We All Talk: The Origin of
Dixie." T*he Pittsburgh Courier*, October 2, 1943.

*Carolina Times* (Durham)*.* "Rebel Flag on March Again." Sep 22, 1951.

Johnson, Gerald. "As I See It: Confederate Flag A Racist Symbol?" *The
Charlotte Post*, Aug 13, 1987.

*Michigan Chronicle* (Detroit)*.* "Ala. Governor Says Play 'Dixie.'" Oct
07, 1967.

NPI. "Negro Band in Comeuppance to Wallace, Plays Not 'Dixie,' But
'Batman' in Inaugural Parade." *Philadelphia Tribune*, Jan 28, 1967.

*Philadelphia Tribune.* "Ban 'Dixie' From Schools, NAACP Urges." Nov 22,
1969.

United Press International. "'Dixie' Is Team's Fight Song; Black Pupils
Rebel." *New Journal and Guide* (Norfolk, VA), Oct 17, 1970.

United Press International. "Students Want 'Dixie' Banned."
*Afro-American* (Baltimore, MD)*,* Feb 22, 1969.

United Press International, "University Band Ordered To Stop Playing
'Dixie.'" *New Journal and Guide* (Norfolk, VA), Oct 05, 1968.

*Wikipedia.* "Dixie." Accessed July 03, 2023.
[[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dixie#Uses_of_the_term]{.underline}](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dixie#Uses_of_the_term)

*Winston-Salem Chronicle*. "Klansmen, family gather to mourn killer of
civil rights leader Evers." Feb 1, 2001.

Young Jr., Whitney M. "Whistling Dixie." *New York Amsterdam News,* Feb
14, 1970.

[^1]: Young Jr., Whitney M. "Whistling Dixie." *New York Amsterdam
    News.*

[^2]: *Michigan Chronicle* (Detroit)*.* "Ala. Governor Says Play
    'Dixie.'"

[^3]: United Press International. "Students Want 'Dixie' Banned."
    *Afro-American* (Baltimore, MD).

[^4]: United Press International. "'Dixie' Is Team's Fight Song; Black
    Pupils Rebel." *New Journal and Guide* (Norfolk, VA).

[^5]: *Philadelphia Tribune.* "Ban 'Dixie' From Schools, NAACP Urges."

[^6]: *Winston-Salem Chronicle*. "Klansmen, family gather to mourn
    killer of civil rights leader Evers."

[^7]: *Carolina Times* (Durham)*.* "Rebel Flag on March Again."

[^8]: NPI. "Negro Band in Comeuppance to Wallace, Plays Not 'Dixie,' But
    'Batman' in Inaugural Parade." *Philadelphia Tribune*.

[^9]: Johnson, Gerald. "As I See It: Confederate Flag A Racist Symbol?"
    *The Charlotte Post*.
