---
title: Stars and Bars vs Stars and Stripes
---

# Stars and Bars vs Stars and Stripes

From the end of Reconstruction well into the 20^th^ century, Black
journalists would frequently criticize the use of the Confederate battle
flag (the infamous "Stars and Bars") in public, especially in official
government capacities. A number of editorials published in the Black
press during this period stressed that the Confederate Battle flag was
"un-American" and a threat to the sanctity of the Union flag. The
language used in these editorials reflects the deep frustration of Black
Americans toward the Confederate flag.

In 1890, the *State Capital* published an editorial (later reprinted by
the renowned *Richmond Planet*) condemned the displaying of the
Confederate flag at the dedication ceremony of the prominent Robert E.
Lee monument in Richmond. While they did not take issue with the
monument itself -- in fact they stated that General Lee "had many
virtues worthy of emulation" -- they referred to the flag as an "ensign
of treason" and its display as a "shameful disregard for the flag of the
Union." They concluded the article by stating "we, as an American
citizen, offer our solemn protest and demand in the name of our fathers,
in the name of the constitution and in the name of every patriotic
impulse that such things not be tolerated."[^1]

One editorial published in the midst of the Cold War by the *Carolina
Times* declared that there was "no difference in displaying miniature
Confederate flags and displaying flags of the Soviet Union." They urged
Congress to pass a law banning the displaying of flags of any nation,
"existent or nonexistent," that has tried to overtake the United States
or taken up arms against it. They included the Confederacy in this
category along with England, Germany, and Japan.[^2]

In 1952, the *Philadelphia Tribune* highlighted conflict over the flying
of the Union and Confederate flags in their coverage of a proposed
constitutional amendment meant to prohibit the flying of any flag
besides the Stars and Stripes at any United States military facility.
The amendment, proposed by Republican Representative H.R. Gross of Iowa,
was reportedly intended to target the United Nations flag. However,
Representative L. M. Rivers of South Carolina asked if the amendment
would also prevent the Stars and Bars of the Confederacy from being
flown. According to the *Tribune*, "when the sponsor declared that it
would, the amendment went out the window." It was repudiated with
overwhelming numbers in the vote that followed.[^3]

In 1958, a bill was proposed in South Carolina that would require the
Confederate flag to be treated with the same respect as the United
States Flag. The *New York Amsterdam News* referred to this legislation
as "the first seeds of treason towards another civil war." The piece
expressed hope that if the bill was ever brought to the Federal Courts
it would be struck down since "we have men on the bench...who simply are
not as stupid and as un-American as the South Carolina Legislature and
its Governor."[^4]

A cartoon printed in the *Carolina Times* by African-American artist
Robert S. Pious in the run-up to the 1952 Democratic National Convention
articulated this perspective visually. Titled, "Will It Replace The
Stars and Stripes At the Convention?," the cartoon is drawn from the
vantage of someone high up in a tree, looking down at a flagpole on
which the Confederate flag has been raised. Beside the flagpole is a
branch of the tree labeled "States Rights," from which a noose has been
hung. A shadowy figure standing at the bottom of the pole and menacingly
glaring upwards has been identified as representing the Dixiecrats.[^5]
This image encapsulated the deep, prevalent suspicion toward the
Confederate battle flag as a tool of intimidation and an emblem of white
supremacism.

*Olivia Haynie*

![](media/image1.jpg){width="6.5in" height="7.458333333333333in"}

References

*Carolina Times* (Durham). "Displaying Flags Of Our Former Enemies."
September 8, 1951.

*New York Amsterdam News*. "Seeds of Treason." April 19, 1958.

*Philadelphia Tribune*. "The Stars and Bars." June 21, 1952.

Pious, R. S. "Will It Replace The Stars and Stripes At the Convention?"
*Carolina Times*, July 19, 1952.

*State Capital* (Springfield, IL). "The Shameful Disregard for the
Flag." *Richmond Planet*, June 14, 1890.

[^1]: *State Capital* (Springfield, IL). "The Shameful Disregard for the
    Flag." *Richmond Planet*.

[^2]: *Carolina Times*. "Displaying Flags Of Our Former Enemies."

[^3]: *Philadelphia Tribune*. "The Stars and Bars."

[^4]: *New York Amsterdam News*. "Seeds of Treason."

[^5]: Pious, R. S. "Will It Replace The Stars and Stripes At the
    Convention?" *Carolina Times* (Durham).
