---
title: Statuary Hall Lee
---

"Glorifying Our Worst Enemies": The Lee Statue in the Capitol

In the waning years of the Civil War, the Old Hall of the House at the
United States Capitol Building was converted into a statuary hall. The
vision for the new chamber was that each state would contribute two
statues of prominent figures from their state to the hall. In 1909, the
Commonwealth of Virginia elected to send statues of George Washington
and Confederate general Robert E. Lee. Black journalists were acutely
interested in the decision to celebrate Lee at the US Capitol and
published a raft of commentary in the years that followed, most of it
critical.

The *Indianapolis Star* published a lengthy editorial in 1909 which
opposed Lee's presence in the Capitol. "Veterans of the Civil War, who
fought for the flag to which Lee was disloyal," the authors contended,
"will be shocked at \[the statue being draped in a Union flag\] and
disposed to regard it as a direct and intentional insult to all men who
loved and were faithful to the Union." The article suggested that the
decision to celebrate Lee actually exposed a "secret shame felt by
present-day Virginians over his course." According to the article, the
representation of the Union flag would confuse people and

> as time goes on and coming generations, unknowing or forgetful of the
> history and issues of the war, look on this statue they will naturally
> assume, seeing the flag, that Lee was a soldier in the Union. A
> hundred years from now, few who look at the figures in the hall of
> fame will recall that he was other than loyal.

The article then claims that many other men were more men "greater than
Lee" to be chosen to represent the best of Virginia such as Thomas
Jefferson, Chief Justice Marshall, and James Madison. [^1]

In 1910, the *Afro-American* (Baltimore, MD) published a piece reporting
on speeches made at a ceremonial function for the Grand Army of the
Republic of Massachusetts. Statements denouncing the decision to place
the statue of Lee in the Capitol generated "great enthusiasm" among the
assembly. A resolution was put forward that demanded "Virginia withdraw
the statue of Lee and if the state refused to do so the congress would
be petitioned to order its removal." In response to these actions, the
"entire body of delegates arose as one man, cheering wildly."[^2]

The *Monitor* (Omaha, NE) and the *Afro-American* published the same
article in 1926 opposing the placement of Lee---or any other Confederate
monument---in Statuary Hall. The article quotes the president of the
Washington D.C. chapter of the NAACP, Neval H. Thomas, who stated: "The
many illustrious Negroes who have rendered distinguished service in
every noble endeavor in our country's history have no place there, and
we feel that in glorifying our worse \[sic\] enemies the nation
discourages patriotism and self-forgetful service."[^3] The *New York
Amsterdam News* also reported Thomas's remarks on Confederates in
Statuary Hall that same year, noting that Lee, "who received his
military training in the Union military academy at West Point and
rewarded the splendid gift with treason, is honored by the presence of
his marble likeness there among those of the patriots and other
benefactors of the United States."[^4]

One piece from this period stands apart from the generally critical eye
cast on the Lee statue by Black journalists. In 1910, the *Kansas City
Sun* republished an article (originally found in *Collier's Weekly*)
criticizing the controversy about Virginia choosing Lee. They wrote:

> It is surprising that any discussion can be carried on about whether a
> statue of Robert E. Lee should be placed in Statuary Hall in the
> capitol at Washington, this being one country. Lee's exceptionally
> fine character is now appreciated as clearly at the North as at the
> South.

The article focused on the argument that the decision to celebrate Lee
was Virginia's and Virginia's alone: "the National government and the
people of the country at large have nothing to do with the decision."
Echoing the Lost Cause myth of the Civil War as driven by a
philosophical argument over "States' Rights," the article claimed that
thinking that the outsiders' "opinions are of any weight in a matter
which belongs exclusively to \[Virginia\]" was a "supererogation."[^5]

In 2020, the Commonwealth of Virginia voluntarily removed the Lee bronze
in Statuary Hall and replaced it with a statue of anti-segregation
activist Barbara Rose Johns. Valentine's Lee statue was placed in the
Virginia Museum of History and Culture in Richmond, where it serves as
an anchor for an exhibit on the shifting politics of Confederate
commemoration.

![](media/image1.jpeg){width="6.5in" height="4.875in"}

*Photograph courtesy of Donovan Schaefer*

*Justin Seward*

References

*Afro*-*American*. "Withdraw Lee's Statue." *Afro-American*, 04/23/1910,
6.

*Monitor*. "Oppose Statue of Rebels in Capitol." *Monitor*, 04/16/1926,
1.

*Afro-American*. "Oppose Statue of Rebels in Capitol." *Afro-American*,
04/10/1926, 2.

*New York Amsterdam News*. "Neval Thomas Opposes Statue to Confederate
Leader in Statuary Hall." *New York Amsterdam News*, 04/07/1926, 9.

*Indianapolis Star*. "Lee and the Flag." *Indianapolis Star*,
08/13/1909, 6.

*Kansas City Sun*. "Lee and Statuary Hall." *Kansas City Sun*,
01/14/1910, 6.

[^1]: *Indianapolis Star*, "Lee and the Flag," 6.

[^2]: *Afro-American*, "Withdraw Lee's Statue," 6.

[^3]: *Monitor*, "Oppose Statue of Rebels in Capitol," 1;
    *Afro-American*, "Oppose Statue of Rebels in Capitol," 2.

[^4]: *New York Amsterdam News*, "Neval Thomas Opposes Statue to
    Confederate Leader in Statuary Hall," 9.

[^5]: *Kansas City Sun*, "Lee and Statuary Hall," 6.
