---
title: The NAACP Boycott of South Carolina
---

# The NAACP Boycott of South Carolina

In July 1999, the National Convention of the NAACP voted in favor of a
tourism boycott of South Carolina. They were responding to the state's
continued display of the Confederate flag on the dome of their capitol
building.[^1] The boycott was proposed by the South Carolina chapter of
the NAACP.[^2] At the time, South Carolina was the only state to fly the
Confederate flag itself at its capitol, although Georgia and Mississippi
had incorporated parts of it into their own state flags.[^3]

The flag hadn't been there for long. It was originally raised above the
South Carolina Capitol in the early 1960s to commemorate the 100th
anniversary of the start of the Civil War, and was then left in place.
Several failed attempts to bring it down had been made since this
initial gesture.[^4]

Even though the resolution to boycott could not be officially ratified
until the NAACP's October meeting, the effects of the proposal came
almost immediately. The boycott made national headlines and the actions
of the NAACP and the effects of the boycott were well documented by the
Associated Press (AP), whose reports were often reprinted in Black
newspapers. A few Black papers also conducted original coverage of the
boycott, such as the *Winston-Salem Chronicle* and *Atlanta Daily*
*World*.

Following the NAACP convention, the *Winston-Salem Chronicle* reported,
the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC) canceled its
convention in Charleston, S.C. The national president of the SCLC,
Martin Luther King, III, stated "Many people try to justify the display
of the Confederate flag by saying it is a symbol of Southern heritage.
But in reality, the flag began to be displayed conspicuously as a symbol
of resistance to the 1954 Brown vs. Board of Education U.S. Supreme
Court decision." He went on to "urge every organization and corporation
who loves justice to join this effort to push America back from the
brink of senseless tribalism."[^5]

The boycott also received the support of civil rights activist Reverend
Jesse Jackson, a South Carolina native.[^6] By early August, NAACP
leadership was already coming up with ways to specifically target
companies who supported pro-flag lawmakers. According to a report by the
Associated Press, the group collected the financial disclosure forms of
fourteen senators and seven House members, most of whom supported
keeping the Confederate flag above the capitol dome. The forms listed
political contributions, income and business connections.[^7]

In mid-October, the tourism boycott was officially ratified, mobilizing
"all \[NAACP\] chapters and members to not visit or spend dollars in
South Carolina until the flag is removed," according to NAACP
spokeswoman Sheila Douglas.

Associated Press reports provided the numerical information on the
impact of the boycott. An AP report printed in both the *Winston-Salem
Chronicle* and *Atlanta Daily World* stated that following the
ratification, several groups from across the country canceled meetings
and events originally planned to be hosted in South Carolina. This
included the Seventh-day Adventist Church who had planned to bring 7,000
people to Columbia for a four-day meeting. That event alone, the article
stated, would have contributed an estimated \$500,000 to the South
Carolina tourism industry.[^8]

On January 20, 2000, the *Los Angeles Sentinel* reported, thousands of
people marched on the South Carolina Statehouse, demanding the
Confederate flag be lowered from the dome. They also demanded the
implementation of an official state holiday celebrating Rev. Martin
Luther King, Jr. The demonstration was organized by the NAACP in
collaboration with the National Urban League and other religious,
social, and academic groups, according to the *Sentinel*. Some of the
protesters held signs reading "Your heritage is my slavery." 16-year-old
Heather Showman, a white high-school student who was attending in
support of the flag's removal, told the *Sentinel*, "We need to get this
flag off the Statehouse and promote racial unity."[^9]

At the end of the month, the *Sentinel* printed an AP report claiming
that Columbia, South Carolina had already lost \$2.6 million to the
boycott. Both the NAACP and local tourism officials stated that over 90
groups had canceled or moved events they had planned to host in the
state. Charleston was estimated to have lost \$2 million in business
revenue and Hilton Head Island, another popular site for tourists, lost
around \$1 million. The NAACP predicted that South Carolina would lose
\$43 million total, based on what groups told the NAACP they would have
spent in the state had they not canceled their events. However, those
numbers came only from groups who had canceled in October, and NAACP
state director Dwight Hames estimated the real impact would be much
more.[^10]

Quick support for the boycott also rolled in from local and national
authorities. Black churches called on shoppers to avoid shopping in
South Carolina during the Easter holiday.[^11] The National Collegiate
Athletic Association's executive committee voted in favor of canceling
future NCAA-sponsored events unless the flag was removed from the dome
by August 11th, 2000, the date of the committee\'s next meeting.[^12]
But the flag's presence on statehouse grounds -- and the NCAA basketball
moratorium -- would last for more than a decade.

South Carolina lawmakers attempted to appease both the NAACP and flag
supporters by proposing ways to remove the flag from the dome without
eliminating its presence from the capitol entirely. The Senate President
Pro Tempore John Drummond suggested ceasing the flying of the flag and
housing it in a glass case in the Statehouse rotunda instead, but
nothing ever came of this proposition.[^13] On May 10th, 2000, the same
day that South Carolina celebrated its first official Confederate
Memorial Day, the state House voted to remove the Confederate flag from
the Capitol dome and have it placed in front of a memorial to
Confederate soldiers on statehouse grounds.[^14]

This solution was not entirely satisfactory to people on either side of
the issue, as the AP captured in a piece reprinted by the *New
Pittsburgh Courier*. According to the article, both staunch flag
supporters and members of the House Black Caucus tried to kill the bill.
Flag supporters wanted to keep the flag on the dome, while many Black
legislators were disturbed that the flag would be put in such a
prominent place.

Earlier that same day, the monument had been vandalized, with the words
"Take it down, don't put it here" spray-painted on its base. Protesters
stood on the statehouse lawn and set Confederate and Nazi flags ablaze
as they shouted "no compromise." A spokeswoman for Governor Jim Hodges
condemned the activity, stating, "We are up here trying to bring people
together. It's unfortunate that extremists on both sides of this issue
are trying to drive people further apart."[^15]

The *Atlanta Daily World* highlighted the rift in the Black community
that came as a result of this vote. NAACP President Kwesi Mfume mocked
the Black state lawmakers who supported the compromise at that year's
NAACP annual meeting, calling them "weak-kneed, shifty-eyed,
back-bending legislators." "Until the flag is removed from a place of
sovereignty," Mfume said in his opening address. "There will be no
compromise on the Confederate flag." According to the report, "his
remarks were met by applause and laughter."[^16]

Black newspapers also showed how different politicians approached the
issue. *New Journal and Guide* reported that while in South Carolina
campaigning for the 2000 election, George W. Bush told the NAACP to stay
out of the flag debate. At a Labor Day festival in Simpsonville, S.C.,
Bush said, "My advice is for people who don't live in South Carolina to
butt out of the issue." This statement was met with cheers from the
crowd. Rev. H. S. Singleton, President of the Conway, S.C. branch of the
NAACP described the statement as Bush, "wooing the white voters of South
Carolina to support his candidacy."[^17]

When Democratic candidates campaigned in the state ahead of the 2004
election, the *Winston-Salem Chronicle* made sure to reprint an article
from the Associated Press describing two candidates' attitudes about the
controversy. Former Vermont Gov. Howard Dean and Sen. Joe Lieberman from
Connecticut, both seeking the Democratic nomination, had said they
opposed the Confederate flag flying in front of the Statehouse, but
"stopped short of endorsing the \[NAACP\] boycott." According to the
report, Lieberman said he wanted to speak to those in opposition of
flying the flag "to get a broader range of opinions on the boycott" and
planned to stay in homes, not hotels, while in South Carolina.[^18]

The editorial sections of Black newspapers captured the lack of
consensus among African-Americans over the value of the boycott,
publishing articles representing varying opinions on the issue. For
instance, The National Center for Public Policy Research (a conservative
news platform) mobilized Project 21, an initiative to promote the
viewpoints of moderate and conservative African-Americans.[^19]

Kimberly J. Wilson, a member of Project 21's National Advisory Board,
wrote a scathing article about the NAACP's boycott. In her editorial,
Ms. Wilson compared the NAACP to her grandfather suffering from
Alzheimer's: "Both were once strong and proud and both have been laid
low by mysterious internal forces." She berated the boycott for imposing
on the time that "many Black people traditionally take their 'let's go
home and see the family down south' vacations," saying she could not
"imagine anyone calling up Big Mama or Aunt Pearl to say. 'Sorry, we
can't come this summer. The NAACP has declared a boycott.'" This type of
article that made specific references to Black American cultural
experiences would really only find an understanding audience in a Black
newspaper.

Ms. Wilson further criticized the boycott for taking money away from
Charleston, "a treasure trove of Black history and heritage, something
that the NAACP apparently has forgotten." She went on to write,

> It's been argued that the boycott is important because of the
> symbolism involved. I'm a little tired of symbolic gestures...I know
> what the Confederate flag represents...I certainly wouldn't be sorry
> to see it banished from the State House, but Black America has some
> very serious non-symbolic problems that should be addressed first.

Among the problems she listed were teen pregnancies, infant mortality
rates, the education gap, rates of drug use, and the AIDS epidemic. Her
article was published in the *New Pittsburgh Courier*[^20] as well as in
the *Michigan Chronicle* under a different title"[^21]

Mr. Earl Ofari Hutchinson had similar criticisms of the boycott, writing
in an editorial in the *Winston-Salem Chronicle* that "at the same
moment the NAACP saber-rattles state officials over a worthless flag,
it's deafeningly silent on the black poverty, school dropout, infant
mortality, and victim of violence rates \[among Black people\] that are
among the worst in the nation."[^22]

But op-ed pages in the Black press also carried many full-throated
defenses of the NAACP's move. Another article published by the
*Winston-Salem Chronicle* declared,

> The NAACP's points about the flying of the Confederate flag are valid.
> If a swastika was flying in front of the New York legislative building
> and Jews raised a stink, no one would say a peep. The NAACP should be
> given the same type of respect.[^23]

While the boycott brought attention to the issue of how the Confederate
flag was revered by South Carolina, it did not bring about its downfall.
Slowly, groups that had participated in the boycott went back on their
decision. In 2009, the Atlantic Coast Conference brought its baseball
tournament back to South Carolina after initially respecting the
boycott. According to the *Winston-Salem Chronicle*, Lonnie Randolph,
president of the South Carolina chapter of the NAACP, stated in response
to this decision, "Initially, they supported the cause of respect,
decency and equality for all people. Have they resorted to their old
policy where they didn't always feel that way?"[^24]

Ultimately, the flag was finally lowered from its position in front of
the Statehouse in the wake of new scrutiny following the Emanuel African
Methodist Episcopal Church shooting. The Confederate memorial it flew
alongside still stands.

*Olivia Haynie*

References

Associated Press. "Candidates to 'study' S.C. Boycott." *Winston-Salem
Chronicle*, February 6, 2003.

Associated Press. "Jesse Jackson Supports Boycott of South Carolina."
*Atlanta Daily World*, August 1, 1999.

Associated Press. "South Carolina Feeling Effects of NAACP Boycott." Los
Angeles Sentinel, January 27, 2000.

*Atlanta Daily World*. "Boycott of South Carolina Urged." July 18, 1999.

Davenport, Jim. "Protest of Confederate Flag in South Carolina." *Los
Angeles Sentine*l, January 20, 2000.

Hettena, Seth. "NAACP Board Votes to Boycott South Carolina."
*Winston-Salem Chronicle*, October 21, 1999.

Hutchinson, Earl Ofari. "NAACP's Confederate flag obsession."
*Winston-Salem Chronicle*, March 14, 2000.

Hunt, Donald. "Colleges skipping South Carolina." *Philadelphia
Tribune*, March 28, 2000.

Iacobelli, Pete. "NAACP condemns ACC taking event to S.C."
*Winston-Salem Chronicle*, May 28, 2009.

National Center For Public Policy Research. "Project 21: A History."
Accessed on July 14, 2023. https://nationalcenter.org/project-21/.

*New Journal and Guide*. "'Butt out,' Bush tells NAACP on South Carolina
flag issue." September 15, 1999.

*New Pittsburgh Courier*. "NAACP bets on compromise." March 11, 2000.

Shepard, Paul. "NAACP Races To Vote." *Atlanta Daily World*, July 16,
2000.

Strope, Leigh. "NAACP ups the ante in S.C. boycott." *Philadelphia
Tribune*, August 6, 1999.

Strope, Leigh. "South Carolina House votes to remove Confederate flag."
*New Pittsburgh Courier*, May 27, 2000.

Wilson, Kimberly J.. "NAACP's boycott is futile approach to minor
issue." *Michigan Chronicle*, September 1, 1999.

Wilson, Kimberly J.. "On the NAACP and boycotts." *New Pittsburgh
Courier*, August 28, 1999.

*Winston-Salem Chronicle*. "Don't Put NAACP Down." April 25, 2002.

*Winston-Salem Chronicle*. "SCLC cancels S.C. conference." July 29,
1999.

[^1]: *Atlanta Daily World*. "Boycott of South Carolina Urged."

[^2]: *Atlanta Daily World*. "Boycott of South Carolina Urged."

[^3]: Hettena, Seth. "NAACP Board Votes to Boycott South Carolina."
    *Winston-Salem Chronicle*.

[^4]: Hunt, Donald. "Colleges skipping South Carolina." *Philadelphia
    Tribune*.

[^5]: *Winston-Salem Chronicle*. "SCLC cancels S.C. conference."

[^6]: Associated Press. "Jesse Jackson Supports Boycott of South
    Carolina." *Atlanta Daily World*.

[^7]: Strope, Leigh. "NAACP ups the ante in S.C. boycott." *Philadelphia
    Tribune*.

[^8]: Hettena, Seth. "NAACP Board Votes to Boycott South Carolina."
    *Winston-Salem Chronicle*.

[^9]: Davenport, Jim. "Protest of Confederate Flag in South Carolina."
    *Los Angeles Sentine*l.

[^10]: Associated Press. "South Carolina Feeling Effects of NAACP
    Boycott." *Los Angeles Sentinel*.

[^11]: *New Pittsburgh Courier*. "NAACP urges Easter boycott." April 15,
    2000.

[^12]: "NAACP Vows To Expand South Carolina Boycott." Atlanta Daily
    World, May 25, 2000.

[^13]: *New Pittsburgh Courier*. "NAACP bets on compromise."

[^14]: Strope, Leigh. "South Carolina House votes to remove Confederate
    flag." *New Pittsburgh Courier*.

[^15]: Strope, Leigh. "South Carolina House votes to remove Confederate
    flag." *New Pittsburgh Courier*.

[^16]: Shepard, Paul. "NAACP Races To Vote." *Atlanta Daily World*.

[^17]: *New Journal and Guide*. "'Butt out,' Bush tells NAACP on South
    Carolina flag issue."

[^18]: Associated Press. "Candidates to 'study' S.C. Boycott."
    *Winston-Salem Chronicle*.

[^19]: National Center For Public Policy Research. "Project 21: A
    History."

[^20]: Wilson, Kimberly J.. "On the NAACP and boycotts." *New Pittsburgh
    Courier*.

[^21]: Wilson, Kimberly J.. "NAACP's boycott is futile approach to minor
    issue." *Michigan Chronicle*.

[^22]: Hutchinson, Earl Ofari. "NAACP's Confederate flag obsession."
    *Winston-Salem Chronicle*.

[^23]: *Winston-Salem Chronicle*. "Don't Put NAACP Down."

[^24]: Iacobelli, Pete. "NAACP condemns ACC taking event to S.C."
    *Winston-Salem Chronicle*.
