---
title: Winston-Salem Monument to Confederate Dead
---

# Winston-Salem Monument to Confederate Dead

In 2015, North Carolina instituted a state law requiring the approval of
the General Assembly for the removal of any monument on public property
that commemorates "an event, a person or military service that is part
of North Carolina's history."[^1]

Included in the affected monuments was a Confederate monument that sat
in front of the old Forsyth County Courthouse in Winston-Salem. The
monument -- a statue of a Confederate soldier standing on a 24-foot tall
base -- was erected in 1905 by the James B. Gordon Chapter of the United
Daughters of the Confederacy (UDC). James B. Gordon was a Confederate
general from Wilkes County, North Carolina who was killed in action in
1864. On the front of the monument, large raised letters read "Our
Confederate Dead," and an engraving on the base "speaks of glory and
fame for Southern soldiers who died in the Civil War."[^2]

The court left the building behind in 1974 and in 2014 it was converted
into a luxury apartment complex.

After the new monument bill had passed the state congress -- but shortly
before Gov. Pat McCrory officially signed it into law -- the
*Winston-Salem Chronicle* reported on attitudes about the statue's
presence. The new building management declined to comment, but did say
they had received no complaints from any of the residents about the
statue.

Deputy County Manager Damon Sanders-Pratt told the *Chronicle* that the
UDC still owned the statue at the time and neither the new property
owners nor the county government could decide its fate. The *Chronicle*
also sought comment from the local chapter of the UDC, but reported that
their requests were ignored.

The *Chronicle* was able to speak with County Commissioner Walter
Marshall, who said he did not believe the statue belonged on government
property. While he thought the statue "has a place in our history and it
should be preserved," he also saw it as a symbol of enslavement and
secession, making it inappropriate for government property.[^3]

In 2017, the monument was the site of a protest conducted by the group
Indivisible Piedmont. As of 2023, Indivisible Piedmont described
themselves on their Facebook page as a group "dedicated to resisting the
Trump agenda."[^4] The protesters objected to the presence of the
monument. A few days before the demonstration, the statue had been
vandalized, although this was quickly cleaned up by city officials.

On the day of the demonstration, the members of Indivisible Piedmont
were met by over a dozen residents armed with guns, who claimed to be
there to protect the statue. The *Chronicle* spoke to two of these
citizens, both of whom declined to offer their last names. One man,
John, asserted he and his compatriots were not part of any hate group
and that their agenda was simply to preserve history "no matter good or
bad." The other man, Rodney, insisted that the KKK and neo-Nazis had
hijacked the symbols of the Confederacy. He stated. "We don't support
the KKK...it has nothing to do with the Civil War or what Robert Lee
represented at all. A lot of people are misinformed on why they're
taking these \[monuments\] down."[^5]

The monument was removed in 2019 and placed into city storage. In late
2022, the North Carolina Supreme Court dismissed the UDC's attempts to
challenge the removal as the monument was on private property.[^6]

References

Indivisible Piedmont. "Indivisible Piedmont NC." *Facebook.com*,
Accessed July 28, 2023,
https://www.facebook.com/indivisiblepiedmontncpage/.

Luck, Todd. "Who owns this statue?" *Winston-Salem Chronicle*, July 23,
2015.

Schoenbaum, Hannah. "NC Supreme Court dismisses suit to return
Confederate statue." *apnews.com*, Accessed December 16, 2022,
https://apnews.com/article/lawsuits-north-carolina-winston-salem-96ea4f928c997ed905fb37991367114b.

Stinson, Tevin. "Protesters and others protecting Confederate monument
meet downtown." *Winston-Salem Chronicle*, August 24, 2017.

[^1]: Luck, Todd. "Who owns this statue?" *Winston-Salem Chronicle*.

[^2]: Luck, Todd. "Who owns this statue?" *Winston-Salem Chronicle*.

[^3]: Luck, Todd. "Who owns this statue?" *Winston-Salem Chronicle*.

[^4]: Indivisible Piedmont. "Indivisible Piedmont NC." *Facebook.com*.

[^5]: Stinson, Tevin. "Protesters and others protecting Confederate
    monument meet downtown." *Winston-Salem Chronicle*.

[^6]: Schoenbaum, Hannah. "NC Supreme Court dismisses suit to return
    Confederate statue." *apnews.com*
